## *De Natura Solis-in-Splendore*

**Auctor**: Childefunsus, Diaconus Maximiniensis.

**Recensor**: Sakiko, Togawa [丰川 祥子], ex universitate illuminati andreae

> Illdefunso of Illumined Maximin, "De Natura Solis-in-Splendore," in *Monumenta Historia Phaetonae: Scriptores Ecclesiae*, vol. XXI, eds. Sakiko Togawa and Mutsumi Wakaba (Parthenope: 1056 p.I.), pp. 178-210.

In the name of Sol's three unitary selves and the unmerciful Phos, to the compatriots and initiates of *Collegia Phari*, *fiat luce* and may Its Phos always guides your mind. It is known by us, and many others, that we walk beneath a sundered sky guided by not Sol in its pure self but by Its three plural selves. Its reason is, however, obscure to many such as the famed Gaudschalk of Orbein when he wrote *De Intercalatione.* Many have changed since then, and that we have many different interpretations on Sol, the Phos, the Three, and many other more topics. Moved not by ambition for worldly renown, for which I possess neither the talent nor the inclination, but by a profound concern for the spiritual weal of those entrusted to my care and, indeed, for the peaceable understanding amongst all who call upon Sol, I have endeavoured to set down in an orderly fashion the principal tenets, arguments, and implications of the paths of Sol.

### On Time

Sol, in Its essence, is the embodiment of Universal Law in Its abode, and that time is the fundamental of all Universal Laws. For one moves in one direction, one cannot revert back to the moment before moving, nor can one cancel the act of moving, which is already happened. This fact is the embodiment of Sol's principle influencing all fundamentals of our perception and our life. The time known to us is divided in various ways, but it is always centred around the cataclysmic event we call the Intercalation. The Past Age (*Saeculus Praeteritus*), the Intercalary Age (*Saeculus Intercalarius*) and the Modern Age (*Saeculus Modernus*) are the three ages known to us, otherwise also called the Dawn, the Noon, and the Dusk. In the dawn age, Sol is on Its rise, but It is only fully felt during the Noon, and Its pure self waned in the Dusk. Many view time is a cycle, as Sol rises and falls day after day, so will the Night and the Second Dawn come in a future. It is therefore our world is also called the World-of-the-days, as we live under the Phos of Sun directly or through the reflex of Moon.

### On Cosmology

The cosmos and the World-of-the-days are two different realms of the universe. The former was born from a primordial black sphere. The matter in the sphere is greatly compressed so that there were great tensions between matters within the sphere. It is attested across different traditions of world creation across many nations and lands, that the material form of the World-of-the-days was born from a sphere, and that Phos is the original tension within the sphere which prompted its division, hence its power creates the world. Sol in Its essence was born out of the necessity to harness the primordial power of Phos, and Its will is reflected as the World-of-the-days. The abode, on the contrary, is a realm of raw power, cosmologically above the World-of-the-days. Around the two is only unorganised void of matter without coherence of “being.” Without the life-giving energy of the Phos, these places do not really have a tangible form, because form creates coherence and meaning.

### On Sol

Sol is the ruler of the abode, the creator of laws and not the sun, which is merely Its projection. Being creator, it is not to say that Sol has a manipulating will which determines all presence. On the contrary, It creates structure and rules that frame the World-of-the-days into a tangible entity. Its presence is felt differently by all beings and that It opens pathways to all, but not dictates. Sol is neither benign nor malicious, but perpetually radiant, perpetually guiding, and perpetually governing the governing. Sol is the return of souls, for the believing and unbelieving, for the willing and unwilling. It guides but not interfere - therefore free will is made possible. When created, Phos gave birth to many beings whose greed enticed great struggle and horror among the humans, but during the Heliomachy, these beings were utterly destroyed at a cosmological level.

### On Phos

Phos, in its nature, is an all-influencing, unmerciful power. It is from observation that we know Sol projects Itself as a orange-yellow sphere to mediate the flow of Phos, therefore the sphere can be blocked temporarily, for instance, by the Moon, and that It also balances it through lunar reflections and subtle leakages through the light dots of the night sky. Sol is a natural creation born out of the need to harness the turbulent Phos, and that only the directed Phos gave birth to the lives in the World-of-the-days. The nature of Phos is threefold: it is infinite, as it is not countable; it is indisputable, as it is not to be refused; it is unmerciful, as it exposes all. Phos grants miraculous power we call magic only when contested by various entities, which means magic only exists in Intercalation.

### On Heliomachy

Our present world, in its known form, is the direct result of a heavenly war between various obscure older beings, whom we call today Ellthon and Dolzzanu, a pair of father and son beings forming the cosmological reality of various religions, which venerate the embodiment of not universal rule but of human nature, which they falsely claim as divine. This war, which Gaudschalk called the War of Sun, lasts as long as the period he called the Intercalary Age. For Gaudschalk, the church in the Past Age, the Church of the Invincible Sun, degenerates in its vanity, corruption and incompetence, due to the fall of human pride and negligence to heavenly ministries, resulting in the rise of various groups of Ellthonians. However, the reason behind Heliomachy is more elusive - as Sol harnesses the Phos, It sought a complete union with it. Ellthon and Dolzzanu formed a wicked coalition with numerous other beings to attempt usurping the *auctoritas* of harnessing Phos, so that they can greedily divide it among themselves. However, as the proxies of Ellthon dragged the war closer and closer towards the world, the overflow of natural power created a period of supernatural upheaval, and such is the nature of the Intercalation.

### On Intercalation

The Intercalation is to all a period of cosmic upheaval and imbalance caused by ambition, for Sol strives to achieve perfection and the others hindering out of avarice. Such lust for power was so strong that earthly beings felt the shock of it. For instance, it is recorded that during the Intercalation, man of Sol spoke words of power and burns the World-of-the-days with evoked beams of Phos, or being guided by Phos so that they can see, hear or predict as if they sees momentarily forward faster than the passage of time; a *miles solis* might, on the other hand, struck a incendiary smite with his sword by calling upon Phos. These acts of magic are profoundly different to the Great Arts and was the result of Phos being disrupted and poured down to the World-of-the-days. Therefore, they do not exist in the present age nor in the past age. However, since Sol governs principles, Its victory is inevitable, but the unity with the unmerciful and powerful Phos also demands the being of Sol can only be limited within *Domus Solis*, as It does not wish to risk to let Phos overflood the World once more. Hence, It can only manifest itself through various intermediary selves to the World-of-the-days directly, and that Its plural and unitary selves were born of this circumstance. For every sect, Intercalaion is not a tragedy to be reversed by a way of restructuring cosmic order.

### On the Three

The Three a manifest in many forms and are in their essence a division of Sol, therefore they are divine and share the basic principles of Sol. The Three embody the principle of coming (Dawn), radiance (Lantern-maker) and passing (Dusk). They have many other names such as the Madrugada, the Sun-in-rags, the Avgidoron, but their essence remains regardless how people call them. The Three are, however, not whole beings on Their own and are by no means complete. The Dawn, who is called the Sun-not-risen-yet, governs the state of coming and reshaping; Lantern-maker refracts and softens the Phos to make it acceptable as a force guiding the World-of-the-days; Dusk governs passing, remembrance, and the return towards Sol. There were many disputes about the nature of the three and is will remain a contest between various different sects.

### On the Soul

The soul is directly embedded with Phos, as it offers the souls many aspects of character, such as mettle, eloquence and vibrancy. Moon absorbs the damage of Phos and reverts it into patience, humility and temperance, another aspects of character gifted to soul. However, the greatest gift of Phos is inspiration, sense and vision, offering the basis of human individuality. Therefore, this is the mediated grace of Sol and Phos. Conversely, since Phos is unmerciful, all aspects of the Grace can as well be great burdens of human. But that grace lies in opportunity, as Caesarius of Relatentia remarked, the opening up of human paths with the capacity of being good, even if originating from unmerciful Phos.

### On the Moon

The Moon is and will be a servant of Sol. Many say that pre-intercalary moon is the domain of an aeon of Sol, one of the lesser beings not contesting but serving Sol, whom they call Menisca. Many would say that in its essence, moon is but a divine instrument or organ of Sol imbued with certain aspects of Sol, representing the principles of reflection, rhythm and repose. It governs the waves of the sea and its phases reflected the cycle between Sun, Moon and Terra. For Moon regulates light, Its phases showed Its function of regulation and mercy through controlling the flow of Phos. It does not produce Phos but only renders it through the night sky. Moon is refined but not perfect, as shown in its grave wounds suffered during the Heliomachy from the enemies of Sol. Moon refracts Phos, therefore grants patience, humility and temperance as an integral part of grace. There are, however, constant debates about Menisca being not as an instrument but as Sol-in-repose, a fourth and. Such quaternitarian thought is constantly debated within different systems of thought, especially the Meniscan Eleotheletists, while the Chandlerites believe that the absorption of Moon will herald the beginning of the Second Dawn. The mainstream church remains silent and divided, but they generally agree on the function of moon being complementary in one or another way.

### On the Church

In the Past Age, there wasn’t a unitary church, despite being called the Church of Invincible Sun. The church, despite tracing its history to the Blessed Illuminator Phaëton, had its foundation laid by king Polydeukes the Just of Parthenope and maintained a conciliar structure before the Intercalation. The church claimed to be ecumenical in a sense that it sought to unite all different micro-Sollistendoms together against various Ellthonian cults persisting in the Past Age. It is, however, not a model church and many crude interpretations, incompetent personnel and inefficient structures persisted. It is militant yet arrogant. During the Intercalation, however, this structure collapsed totally due to a lack of coordination and the Blessed Illuminator Silvius the Great established the Ecumenical Pontificate at the city of Colonia Clara, which is the city closest to sun. There are many forms of the church. The sect following the Pontifex was called the Church of the Unyielding Sun, while many follow different interpretations. I will come back to these sects later.

### On Ecclesiology

There are church servants for the sake of maintaining constant vigilance towards the misuse of Phos and providing interpretations of Phos through the holy language, namely, High Luquanian. High Luquanian is also the language of all rites according to the third council of Nizza. The purpose of the church is to act as proxies to the Three in the World-of-days, to ensure the potential of Phos is well-used by the believers and suppress wrong doctrines. For as Leudwart of Vercelli once said, the church is the projection of the abode in the World-of-the-day. The base organisation of the church is the parochia, which is headed by a speaker (loquator), who performs church service and rites, such as inluxination and cremation. The parochia is organised differently in different sects. In the Unyielding sect, it is integrated into an episcopal system; for Eleotheletists, an appointed pontifical legate will supervise inter-parochial governance; for Isophotists, there will be an elected council of clerics.

### On the Great Arts

The great arts studied by our collegia is an epistemological tradition about how to make use of Phos’ grace. It is separated into *Ars Diei* and *Ars Noctis*, about observing the miracles of Sol and the wonders of the night, dream world. It also entails the study of many obscure ancient texts written in languages like Welioglyphics, Nia'gallish or Frikkisk. The great arts are of nothing similar to magic as it does not seek to harness Phos at a crude way or to wield them in an unruly way, but only studies to observe rules, patterns and interpretations. The first *collegium* was established by Charles le Clerc, who is from Nizza and a prominent scholar of Astromechanics.

### On the Invisible Arts and the Questionary

The invisibles arts, on the contrary to the Great Arts, are but crude imitations of the so-called magic, which is in itself no more than a symptom of the disruption of cosmological rules and the flow of Phos. Its practitioners often imitates the coarsest way of studying esoteric knowledge, which is to brutally bend different mediums of Phos and create temporary disruptions. Such approaches are but nonsense yet dangerous as uncontrolled, materialised Phos poses great threat to untrained believers, a sign of profound provocation of Phos with the most malicious of intentions. The Questionary, under the direct jurisdiction of the Three, possesses a list of acts worthy of recommending and acts worthy of condemning, and hunts relentlessly the aforementioned false practitioners accordingly. It is necessary to re-iterate that only permitted *collegia* are to study Great Arts within its enclosure. It is observed, however, the stronger one's soul is, the less "magic" can do, while a strong soul is always stable and abundant in Phos - a universal truth first proved in the Intercalary wars, in which not those with their incendiary smites or resplendent beams prevailed, but those having heart and discipline as hard as steel, then proved by the prowess of the quaestors in their deepness of soul against the nonsense of "Fireballs" or "Chain Lighting," rendering these chants into meaningless sounds unable to provoke the flow of Phos.

### On the Second Dawn

The eschatological vision of Sollist churches cannot bypass the *telos* of the Second Dawn. The prophecy of Yuhanna son of Harun goes, "The seven shall go on a procession in the sky, the Lamp shall find Its knyghts, the abode shall lit a thousand candles, the scars shall fade before the path of Sun." Gaudschalk claims that this signifies a "second dawn coming," while all souls will return to Sol, it is according to good work and free will of using grace that one may deem oneself worthy of joining the procession, and that seven is a vague figure. The Unyielding Church in general agrees with Gaudschalk. However, they also argue that the Second Dawn is a cosmological necessity which allows the pure from of Phos to reform, correct and emend the whole World-of-the-days. on the contrary, Eleophysite thoughts reject the prophecy and claims that the Second Dawn is not an apocalypse (revelation) but a false prophecy, and suggest that souls worthy in its radiance will join an eternal white procession with Lamplighter to remain vigilant and maintain cosmic balance, in order to not make the Second Dawn happen.

### On Sects

As Sol recluses Itself within the limits of the Abode, worldly sects pose different views upon various Sological principles. As initiates of the great arts, however, we are not bound to such disputes at the price of we are not to talk about it in public lest the unknowing misinterprets as their mind are not prepared to absorb the manifestation of purer and harsher Phos.

**Homoianism**: The Three are only similar to Sol by holding *auctoritas* but essentially unequal nor sharing a same essence, therefore they are lesser beings subordinate to the divinity of Sol instead of aspects representing the essence of Sol.

**Eleophyisitism**: The Intercalation, when viewed by its results and Sol's intention, was a merciful event. Because Phos is inherently unmerciful, the Intercalation, driven by Sol's intention, resulted in a necessary balance that prevented total annihilation by unrestrained Phos. Therefore, the current world is already in this Sol-intended balance, and the prophesied Second Dawn, which implies another overflow of Phos, is unnecessary or even detrimental to this achieved equilibrium. Therefore, it can be said that the nature of Sol is clement.

**Isophotism**: Agrees with Eleophysitism's eschatology and stance on the *physis* of Sol. The received Phos in every person is equal and manifests equally, therefore no hierarchical ecclesiology that helps to regulate Phos is Sologically necessary for devotion but only functional in certain practices.

**Dyophysitism**: Sol has a merciful and an unmerciful nature, represented in a combination of whiteness and orangeness in Its projection)

**Eleotheletism**: Sol is ambiguous but Its guidance to all has a clement will so that the return to It will be proper, and that the Second Dawn has a mereciful purpose.

**Umbrism**: Mercy, in its essence, can be only found in shadow, therefore Sol is not to be worshipped but to be respected as only an ambivalent giver of rules. The Umbrists praise the silence and persistence of Menisca, deeming It as a unique creation showing the mercy of shadows through Its phases. They also argue that there is or will be a *domus meniscae*, a reflection of Sol's abode and a tranquil, beautiful, silent space where soul is sheltered from Phos' lack of mercy.  Therefore, they often embrace Quaternitarian thoughts as well.

**Chandlerianism**: It posits that the Chandler, whose existence is "testified" by Yuhanna's prophecy, an entity born as a the embodiment of Solar *auctoritas* in its full, will be the result of the Second Dawn. Out of necessity, Sol will still be an inactive in its abode but its principle essence, united with Phos, will project as an integral entity. The metaphor is that, individuals are candles waiting to be kindled in a divine spark by the Chandler, who is active, bears the ambivalent will of Sol and accommodates the unmercifulness of Phos to act benevolently and actively as their messenger in the World-of-the-days.
 
**The (mainstream) unyielding church**: Sol by Its nature is Unyielding (neither merciful nor unmerciful as the governing of governing); Phos is unmerciful; the Three are in their essence aspects of Sol (nor deities or individual beings) and agree equally divine in the World-of-the-days; Moon is to be venerated as It contains a special granted essence of Sol, but It is not a division of Sol; Sol does not have a anthropomorphic form but due to human weakness Its three can for the sake of being understood; the Second Dawn is necessary for a reunited Sol and Phos and will cleanse the World-of-the-days; the potential of receiving Phos is equal but the amount is not so clerical guidance is necessary 
