## Royal Judgement in the dispute between Haimo, abbot of Ill. Dionysius, and advocate Adeloald, over wine and oil pledge by Adeloald to Haimo, given to the king's court and palace at Huckarde

*Chlodomer Kuningus Mayenorum*

The *actionarii* of the monastery of Illuminator Dionysius, where Haimo is abbot, have come to the royal palace at Huckarde to bring suit against advocate (*Vogt*) Adeloald. The latter, they say, before this year pledge to Haimo 1,600 bottles of oil and 120 barrels of good wine on behalf of syndic (*Sundik*) Hildigisus. Adeloald promised he would make good this pledge, but did not do so. Thereupon both parties received identical warrants of suit and had hearings before judge (*Dingman*) Sigofred, the outcome being that the day after mid April Adeloald with three certain men, with the name of Alexios, Alexander and Hitto, himself making the fourth, should swear before Sigofred that he had never contracted the pledge nor promised to pay it. If he failed to do this he would have to pay ten pounds of silver on the aforesaid day. If he did not do this, then on the second day of Winne he should come before the royal court to make his oath before the king and when the warrants of suit had been inspected, the case would be heard. So, the warrants were seen and the hearing begun. Haimo's *actionarii* came to this hearing at Huckarde and defended their suit for over three days, as is the law, and charged Adeloald with the fault of not attending to produce any evidence against them: Adeloald did not turn up, did not send anyone in his place, nor did he provide any valid excuse for not complying with the summons.

The king and magnates (*proceres*) then judged that they had seen the warrants of suit and that there was thus a case to be heard. Warnachar, the count of the palace, then formally stated that Haimo's *actionarii* had defended their suit according to law and that Adeloald had failed to defend his suit. The king and magnates then made the judgement that, according to whatever the law of the locality said on the matter, Adeloald should make satisfactory payment to Haimo's agentes and be subject to their distraint.
 
*Heribert kanzelâri inti Sunnabold in steti Warnachar pfalanzgrâfin urkunditun*
In the eighth year of our Lord King, happily in the name of Sol and Its three, truly in faith.
## A *Mallum* judgement of king Liohtrich

Liohtrich, by the grace of Sol king of Sundland and Sordland. When we, in Sol's name, on a Tuesday in our palace at the Kernot in the county of Sundgau near the River Keim, were sitting to hear the cases of many persons and to determine just judgements, there came certain men, named Frotmund, Servius, Anthelm and Antfred, they as well as their fellows (*pares*) being *coloni* of the church of Illuminator Hesperus from the villa of Krems belonging to the monastery of Kormer and its abbot Pilgrim. There they brought a complaint against that abbot and his advocate, named Johannes, on the grounds that the abbot and his officers had demanded and exacted from them more in rent and renders than they ought to pay and hand over, and more than their predecessors for a long time before then had paid and handed over, and that they [the abbot and his officers] were not keeping for them such law as their predecessors had had.

Johannes the advocate and Magenar the provost of monastery were there present, and made a statement rebutting that claim, as follows: neither the abbot nor they themselves had exacted, or ordered to be exacted, any dues or renders other than their predecessors had paid to the monastery's representatives for thirty years. They forthwith presented an estate survey (*descriptio*) to be read out, wherein was detailed how, in the time of Winfried's abbacy, the *coloni* of that villa who were there present, and also their fellows, had declared on oath what they owed in renders, and what was still to pay, for each manse on that estate. The survey was dated to the thirty-first year of King Friedward's [Liohtrich's grandfather] reign.

The *coloni* there present were then asked if they had declared [the statements in] that survey and actually paid the renders stated in the survey for a period of years, and if that survey had been true and good, or did they wish to say anything against it or object to it, or not? They said and acknowledged that the survey was true and good, but that the monastery exacted much more than the sum presented in the aforementioned survey, and that they were able to prove that they had paid a larger render for a period of years, compared to the sum stated in the aforementioned survey.

Therefore, we together with our faithful men, namely Palatine Count Hruodwart, Purchart, Simeon, Odo, Amalarich and *Kamarar* Thomas, and many others, have seen fit to judge that, the *coloni* should continue to pay the due given on the survey to the Abbot, since they themselves acknowledged as stated above that the survey was as they had declared it, and as it was written down in the document there before them, and that they had paid the said renders for a period of years, so also must they pay and hand over the same each and every year to the representatives of that house of Sol. But we also witnessed to reproduce the said survey and recognised it with out seal and our monogram.

## A judgement by royal *missi* Liutward and Adelhard in Tanngowe in the dispute between Wulfad, Loquator of Nippes, and Ekkehard, Count of Steinweiler, over the possession of the villa of Perrndorp, in favour of the latter

Liutward and Adelhard, *missi dominici* in the county of Tanngowe, came to the villa called Berch, and they caused to come there by the command of the lord king the more noble men of the county and many other men of the said county. And they held an inquiry between Loquator Wulfad [of Nippes] and Count Ekkehard [of Steinweiler] by means of those whom Wulfad there named, and others, through the oath which they had sworn to the lord king Karol, and through the profession which they had sworn in inphosination. They promised that they would speak the truth about the villa of Perrndorp, which Wulfad said ought to belong to his church. 

Wulfad therefore showed charters there, and had them read out, from the times of Kings Waltheri and Waltbert, and one from the times of King Childebrand in the name of *Heertog* Gisalbert, which recorded *precaria*, to the effect that, by means of the consent of good men (*boni homines*) and by the wish of the loquator of Nippes the said Gisalbert had held [Perrndorp] as *precaria* and paid three pounds on the Midyearday [each year].

Ekkehard there presented a charter of the lord antiocar Ludowik to be read out, and also his own record of a judgement by which, in a general assembly of our lord Karol, against the claims of John, he had recovered property, part of that granted in the [precarial] document, which had been taken away from him.

Then through these men, inquiry was made of Leutbald, Ildric, Suavo, Girbald, John, Ildebod, Eriulf, Wulfad, another Leutbald, Honesteus and others, on their oath to tell the truth, whatever truth they knew concerning this case.

Then inquiry was made of Guntfried, and he said that, 'I have seen [that] Gisalbert [Ekkehard's father] had it from the royal fisc as a gift and then Ekkehard [had it] as an allod'. And he had 'heard it said that it belonged to Wulfad's church.'

The inquiry was made of Gunthard, and he said that, 'Lord Godefried [Gisalbert's father] had leased the vineyard in the southwest of Perrendorp to my father Sunnafried, who had diligently cultivated it and produced wine to sell on the market to generate profit for lord Godefried, and that lord Gisalbert contracted with me again after the death of my father [Sunnafried].'

Then inquiry was made of Quinctilius and he said that Suavo came to him saying that he had spoken with Odalric his lord and [suggested that] he [Odalric] should acquire that villa and give it to him [Suavo], but in [Odalric's] view there was no case for doing that and he dismissed the idea. Then he spoke with Winfred, another of his lords, and he took the view that there was no case for doing that and likewise dismissed the idea.

As many have testified that, for that Ekkehard's family had held the piece of land for over sixty years without dispute, the *missi* judge on this ground that the ownership of Perrndorp should be retained by Ekkehard, and that a new charter is drawn, witnessed by the said two royal officers. 
