[The Meta-author's note: while it is completely impossible to conlang everything, modern English will be used as modern English per se for the sake of readability, therefore the latinate terms WITHIN the apparatus of modern English is preserved. The narrative voice attempts to capture the style of the original author, Lomprecht of Trufer, an early-post-Intercalary historian. Readers will note that the classical and liturgical language of this world, Chancery Lucanian, is derived from an Oscan-like Italic language rather than Latin. Therefore specific terms will follow the orthography of in-world Parthenopese or Kankelarian Lukanian, which means we will have Sol Inviktos, the Petvarinarian (Quaternitarian), and Archilokter (original Lukanian might be Arhilogitir, but the prefix can easily be borrowed from Thalassaran)]

# Dat Getat des Giselrieches

The History of the Realm of the Gisels
Author: Lomprecht, Archiloquetor and urban councillor of Trufer
Translated by Awa Subaru

#### The Preface of Lomprecht, Metropolitan Speaker of the *basilica* in Trufer

A great many things keep happening, some of them good and some of them bad, both remain nevertheless memorable. My intention, with the help of the Holy and Indivisible Petvarinarian Wielders of Solar Authority, is to write a little book, to lay out the traditions about the Gisel people, from the very commencement of its existence to the day we live. I have written this work to keep alive the memory of those dead and gone, and to bring them to the notice of future generations, because as the Phosters have said, 'To constantly reform and improve oneself, one must always strives to learn more,' and a well-written history is a good mirror of human deeds. The subject is one that demands immense labour. Yet reader, my style is not very polished, and I have to devote portions of my text to the study of history itself.

There are, indeed, many traditions of what happened prior to many things: then ancestors of the Gisel people, the life and deeds of Wisaword the Apostle, the foundation of Giselwiech, the rule of Walther the Hegemon, and so on. Many had, out of their love of knowledge, their pursuit of personal refinement and their intention to provide exemplars for the posterity, or sometimes aggrandising certain rulers and courts, written many books of history which, some preserved into our days, some preserved in excepts in pages or excepts, while some were completely lost. But the intention of my writing is to inspire you readers, on the subject of the life and morals of the community, and the men through their qualities contributed to the steadfastness of the common welfare. But equally I wish to represent to you the other side: the impiety, wickedness, rashness, the short-sightedness of many, who misused the power conceded to them by the state and breaks the concordance and peace of the realm; or that when they review their life, they found themselves not contributing to the common benefit.

There is this exceptionally beneficial and fruitful advantage to be derived from the study of the past, that you see, set in the clear light of historical truth, examples of every possible type. From these you may select for yourself what to imitate, and also what, as being mischievous in its inception and disastrous in its issues, you are to avoid. And should anyone say that I am simply rehashing familiar matter, much of what I say having been already set out, at length, many years ago, I would reply that man’s ingenuity and his innovations are every day extended, so that as time goes on, new subtleties are found which the ancients could not have imagined – so that my own book must have at least some use.

Hence this prologue as an introduction to this book, so ends my prologue.

## Boek Eins

 #### A *Kredom* of Lomprecht

Proposing as I do to describe the history of the Gisels, I wish first all to explain briefly my beliefs, so that whoever reads me may know that this history is not written for the believers of *Sol Indumitos*, but from one who believes that: Sol the Almighty, originally with the false name *Sol Inviktos*, in facing the catastrophe called Intercalation granted Its authority (*Oberecheit*) to the Three, namely the First-Light (*Ersteleecht*), the Watchman (*Wachter*) and the Sun-in-rags (*Lampensunne*), and the Heavenly-Moon, the *Meniska*; that the Petvarinity (not the Three) are the extension of Its authority in the same Essence, which despite seemingly neutral as the laws of nature, indeed has an eternal, clement intention (*Thelema*); that therefore the capability for all individual to receive *Phos* is equal; that the Petvarinity, being the protector of Its rules, which was established in the creation, will ensure the proper ending and return towards the House of Sol, which is in balance and need not to be disturbed by the Second Dawn; of the End of World I believe it is merely a return to Sol, when It deemed the soul is prepared to receive peacefully pure and bright *Phos* which It grants to us all as a gift, in its fullness will give us the eternal inspiration, eloquence and senses.

#### 1.1 On Creation

And now I shall begin describing the earliest histories in the traditions of the great chroniclers Apollodoros of Pella and Arseniis of Epikroteia, who diligently recorded the earliest of histories prior to the arrival of Apostle Phaethon and wrote the earliest history of the Tolnars and the Thalassarans. Nikephoros of Kleopolis, who composed a universal history up to the rule of Antiochos the Magnificent of the Batrachedes family. And finally the *Deeds of the Giselwaltanda* by Degeno of Trufer, the first historian of us. I will follow the example of writers whom I have mentioned and in my turn to reckon these entire series from the obscure creation of man down to our own time.

The world, as it is related, is created from a very dense black sphere, which in turn is filled by the primordial *Phos* [The Holy Radiance]. Within the sphere, the Radiance was constantly moving, changing positions, opening crevice and sealing leakages, eventually the tension caused the sphere to implode and release *Phos* in its fullest energy, therefore creating many unregulated matters. Sol appeared as a natural result of this, because naturally these matters ran their courses into a fixed route, which Sol regulated according to *Phos* and modified these malleable matters into everything we know. The birth of human, like all other types of lives, was a natural result of the world developing according to the sacred Rules of Sol, which demanded that one specific type of life is to receive Its grace and mediate the existence of Radiance, to make it accumulate in individuals in its greatest possible quantity and therefore making it stable, far from the tension-creating form existing in the black sphere.

Sol allowed the world to develop methodically. For the first millenium after the Implosion Sol created two realms, the House of Sol and the World-of-the-days; in the second millennium the sky was constantly shaping and reshaping into a black sphere decorated by Sunna, the Moon, the planets and stars, so that *Phos* is evenly cast onto every corner of Gotha [or Gea] every Sunnan cycle, for Moon and the Stars conveyed mediated, mild and clement *Phos* in the night and even sometimes extending to the day; the third millennium the world evolved with mountains rising and oceans filled; the fourth millennium the world is further carved by the natural forces into what it is known today, with all these hills, rivers, valleys; the fifth millennium the world is filled of lesser lives; and eventually in the sixth millennium human was granted the Holy Illumination and became distinguished from all other lives. Moreover, they also acquired the rein over some of these lives in these years, as they were inspired by Its grace through learning many things, such as hunting, herding, farming, fishing, and many other skills - the gift we call inspiration.

#### 1.2 On the First Men

But the primordial men, while on one hand had the potential granted by Its grace and *Phos*, on the other hand were ignorant to the Words of Sol. Despite some Rules of Sol were known to them, they were greatly obscure and venerated instead a Father-Son pair called repectively Ellthonis and Dolzzaniis. They believed at first in the sanctity in the thing closest to their form and therefore depicted the two as anthropromorphic beings, but Ellthonos and Dolzzanos in their essence were the residues of unregulated, primordial *Phos*, which Sol always strived to get hold of. From the veneration of the two a deep-rooted principle called *Agon* was also born and rooted indeed in the human being. It seemed to me that many nations often claimed to have been descended from a first pair of people. The Thalassarans claim that their ancestors were Thalassanos and Hellia, signifying the Sea and Sunna; the Himarians claim that the foremost couple was called Adim and Hawwal, which mean a man and life; the Pyrigians claim they are descended from Tarchon and Iulia. For the Gisels it is said that all people descended from a certain pair, Irminaz and Fritha, because they thought the world is created in the tension of profoundness and peacefulness. This, I believe, suggests the existence of a state of multiplicity, and that men of different nation are derived from their respective ancestors.

According to many legends the first men degraded generation by generation, a point which I mostly disagree. Then as men multiplied and began to spread across the whole earth, they were also further divided according to tribes or cities. The tradition of Degeno, who travelled around the land of the Gisels and had collected tales from the old men from many other regions. According to him:

> To begin with, it is generally admitted the Gisels were the descendant of Theudariks and Freuwja, a pair among the many descendants of Irminaz and Fritha. Freuwja bore three sons, called respectively Gunthwodiz, Gislazharjaz and Gaizanaudiz. The mother, observing the sky for three years, then told to her sons an oracle and sent them each to establish a city. The first established a city in the north called *Reudaz Viekuz*, after he bested the best local warriors, who were famous of their red hair; the second, advised by a trader from Toutana, picked a very good place on the river of Talbe, which is convenient for either trading or cultivating, and then named the town with the name *Gislaz Viekuz*; the third came to the land of the Awans and was respected by them as a hero, and hence the region he controlled was called the *Halith Viekus*. Then, the apostle Wisaword came to these princes each and taught them the words of Sol, so the Gisels became illuminated very early on.
> 
> Then as the subjects of the three princes multiplied beneath heaven, they also sent out their children to different lands to establish their own feunies. Gunthowodiz sent Alariks, who established Rugiland when he encountered many local farmers cultivating rye; and Redabalthaz, who established a stronghold among the Schwynens; and Knodomeriz, who went to the south, uniting all men there and established Allemannen. Gislazharjaz sent Irminazfridu to the land of trees, Terwingen; he sent Sunnaberahtaz to the west and cultivated Neustland; he also sent Frumoheruz to the region of Magenland, and Erkanharjaz to Sillingen. Gaizanandiz first sent Halithbrandaz to the island, which we call Heldeland today; then he sent Hluthawig to the littoral area called Littland; finally he sent Karilwardana to the land of many river coasts, Ripoarland.

This is to say that the Gisels, from their very beginning, are divided into various groupings. There were other interpretations of this origin event. For instance, many claimed the first brother was called Gundowald; Friedfram the Burgener in his *Chronicles* claimed that the three brothers wer descended from a sea monster; Siesnando of Hispalis claimed that these people were descendants of a powerful chieftain, considered a face of Ellthonos very early on, with the name of Mannis, which means a person, or the specific person who led the Leodars; a later song also claimed that the three brothers were in fact conquered by Waltuhari, whose deeds I will describe later. Therefore I should say there isn't a sole beginning of the Gisels in this way as well, and that 

But I won't treat the legendary lines of each of these groups in the greatest detail. For one should know that these people existed very long time before the world we know or the Phoster Apostle Phaethon, so that their obscure deeds were often more bardic than realistic. It shall be suffice to say that these groups were prone to violent exhortations, war and a deliberate show of power in an unilluminated form. These various districts were ruled by men presiding the original *mahal* of all freemen, called *dingmann*; in some cases a *kuningikin*, a chieftain styling himself as a king; sometimes *ewawarden* as they governed the customary law; and sometimes *burgazwarden*, as they ruled over a fort usually on atop a hill, but sometimes on other strategic locations. These leaders in common relied their power on two pillars: the cattle (*fehu*) they possessed, and the following, called *ginoez* or *fuora*, of younger warlike men, with whom they pillaged and robbed and waged war against each other. They venerated faces of Ellthonos and created many myths around them. On the other hand there began to rise a certain amount of men who saw Sunna as a face of Ellthonos and venerated her, and to some extend the Moon as a divine god. Furthermore, in line with the oldest human beings they venerated natural phenomena and assumed that words like *Lohezzunga* and *Sturma* represented divine beings, which is, partially correct. This is indeed in line of how faith evolved commonly in other histories.

#### 1.3 On the Earliest Empires

There existed many Ellthonic states prior to the rise of Phosphorism, and I shall treat their history very briefly here. The first of these empires was the Bothonic Empire, which stretches from the most western Beinn Mountains all the way to the Elmic Island. Allegedly they wer led by a powerful queen called Ebona, who was said to have been an exquisite charioteer and conquered many lands. But their dominance ended quickly as the people first disintegrated into tribes and later were conquered or expelled by the Toutanians. Afterwards the Kemetic Empire rose along the Memno; But after its long contentions with the Baglemites and the Upper Memnites, the Media-Aproconian Arzhavashians rose and conquered Kemetia and Northern Baglem and to some extent upper Memnonia. It is said that a certain mercenary general called Euklathides established a kingdom called Baktria in Northern Baglem, first as a satrap and later gaining independence. The Arzhavashians also conquered part of the Dorians. But after their conquest of Aramaia and Himaria failed, the Dorians overthrew their suzerains and rose as the dominant force around the Kardial Sea. They called this era a heroic era, first because they claimed a certain man called Demokles performed many splendid deeds and became a divine being, and later in this time the Island Kephatheia was conquered by Wiluseians, but the Wiluseian Leaders Remos and Antenor after that converted to the cult of Sunna, which made their compatriots very dismayed and exiled them. While Remos was exiled and he founded a new country called Elysion in Hesperia, across the Occasian Ocean, Antenor moved to Rutilia and founded Parthenope. In the mean time the Dorians colonised many coastal places and frequently contended with the Toutanians, also called Pyrigians. These series of states lasted very long but they were only treated briefly by ancient historians, which I also copied down here.

The Gisels, on the other hand, were at this state forming a series of Kingdoms. From the early ignorance they gradually formed a structure of written works, which is written in the Old or Waltherian Alphabet different from what we read nowadays. Sometimes in this era they adopted the Pyrigian letters instead so nowadays we still used them for writing our Giselian language. In this period, moreover, the new ruling families replaced the older families of the direct descendants of the three brothers, this included the ruler of Giselwiech. This man, who came from Rugiland and called by people in their reverence Attila, which means in Rugil dialect 'Little Father', overthrew the descendant of Gislahari, because the king, called in foreign fashion Luvkis Tarkinios, was very proud and he murdered his brother Wulfawald and his mother to secure his throne. Moreover he constanly levied from the Giselwiechers by forcing them into endless corvee labour and rent payments. Eventually they invited Attila and made him the new King. And this Attila was the ancestor of the later king Frodmund.

#### 1.4 About the deeds of Phoster Phaethon

It was approximately synchronous that the Cult of Sol evolved from a branch of Ellthonism. Initially people venerated idols and deemed the nature as deities, but soon these people were attacked by Ellthonists who claimed the deities were to be anthropomorphic and therefore the icons they venerated were false. So after these people converted to the Ellthonic Sol, many indeed felt with a stronger connection with Sol, for they had an abundance of *Phos* in their interior even when they venerated a wrong interpretation of Sol, as It demonstrated its power clearly. And to interpret the Words of Sol, the earliest believers developed various languages. The most primordial of them is called Simorgian, or bird-speech, from the name of an Arzavashian fable about the gathering of birds; then people invented the Welioglyphics, an *Aithos*-bearing word. But one created sacred letters without a Sacred Word, without the necessary discerning of Sunna and Sol, without the explanations about the true form of divinity, and hence came the Phoster Phaethon.

The Phos-illuminated Apostle Phaethon was born in the 1026th year prior to the Intercalation to a nobleman called Apollinaris and a women called Parthena, in the port called Hierakleia on the Island of Kephatheia. He was taught by certain wise men who came from the south, who gave him a inscribed tablet made of astral-iron, which is very rare and especially precious in its form being rectangular. One day, the young man arose at night when he heard the Radiant Fulgers sent him a message which they said was written on the tablet. In the morning a brave man called Amirani from Lazike came to him and brought him another tablet and said that he had dreamt of the two tablets coming together. Phaethon thanked him sincerelyl and invited him to read together. After reading the inscriptions, the young man Phaethon set up an altar to a painting of Solar-circle instead of an iconography of Ellthon. The king of Kephatheia, called Eleutheros, was greatly amazed and sent some men to seek this thing out, and Phaethon debated against them with perhaps the greatest ever of eloquence and rhetoric, which made them completely persuaded and instantly prostrated in front of him. Later he went to the amphitheatre and made a speech there, while interrupting the play about Dolzzanos there. A certain angry man called Paetos hit him with an axe in his forehead, which wounded him gravely, but miraculously the next day he appeared in front of the citizens without any frailty or scar, which made them astonished and therefore they believed what he said.

But at this time, certain people from Doria with vile intentions accused the Apostle and his followers as Arzhamagian, or mages using vile magic of fire, therefore all their condemnations against Ellthonism were false. But the Apostle debated with them keenly about the fact that the world is composed of the elements, namely water, wind, metal, wood, and earth, and that fire is born from the interaction of Phos with wood, which is facilitated by air and helped by the clinging of metal. This made the men very amazed and they gave up accusing him. There were also two men debating the closeness of Sunna, while one deeming the Sunna is always larger nearer to the horizon, the other argued that Sunna is closer in the noon because the noon is always hotter. For this the Apostle replied that it is out of the intention of Sol to mediate *Phos*, when the unmerciful *Phos* is the strongest It look smaller, while the *Phos* is weaker when It appeared larger, and that for one's eye and skin felt differently, this is because of the balance in the House of Sol.

Then, Phaethon went preaching around every corner of Kephatheia, teaching how they were embedded with the potential of Phos, how this demonstrated a divine will, and how this gift might lead one to a peaceful ending. He went to Agothia and Epithalia and then collected many disciples. The Melkthonians were roused to hatred against him, persisting to their Ellthonic faith and striving to unjustly destroy the Just. But at this time Antenor the Old, the King of the Agothians, destroyed their army and sanctioned Phaethon to preach in and out of his country. Therefore he also went to Chaenia, Grecia, and then into the lands of the Hyllatae, the Ippates, before entering Rutilia and the western Caridal regions. It is said that he had 3,600 disciples, 72 of them were the most extraordinary and were therefore also called apostles, and these men spread from the northern Bothonia to the southern Himaria. He died peacefully in the land of the Arebacians when he was 72.

#### 1.5 About how the Apostles Hermund and Wiesurd arrived in the land of the Gisels

At this time, as the light of the Apostle Phaethon's teaching spread through the southern lands, it drew to itself many souls from afar. It prompted the surge of many communities of men venerating Sol. Among these were the brothers Hermund and Wisaword, called by the men of our days Wiesurd. These men were merchants from the northern port of Kentowick, of the Awan people, who in the course of their trade had sailed their ship to the city of Motta. There, in the marketplace, they heard the Apostle Phaethon speak, and as he explained the nature of the inner *Phos* and the difference between the material Sunna and the divine Sol, they were seized by his wondrous words. They forsook their trade and followed him for six years, diligently learning the sacred teachings. There they also worked to translate his teachings into the Gisel-tongue.

At last, filled with the desire to bring this illumination to their own kin, the brothers took their leave of the Apostle and began the long journey back to the lands of the Awans. But the path of the illuminated is often beset by trials, for the world still held many dark places where the law of Sol was unknown. In a forested pass of the Guleon, their caravan was preyed upon by brigands. The older brother, Hermund, in defending their meagre possessions, was struck with an axe when he used the book to defend himself and therefore murdered. The thieves, finding little gold, took the clothes from his back and, most grievously, the book of teachings he carried. However, as the men took their leave, suddenly a pack of wolf appeared from the woods a surrounded them, as well as Wiesurd.

And a temptation arose in the heart of Wiesurd, for here was worldy justice, a vengeful end for the wicked. But then, a revelation of the Fulgers came to him, a current of pure *Phos* that burned away his anger. He understood that Sol’s way was not destruction, but the restoration of order. He stepped forward into the space between the killers and the wolves, and he spoke. He spoke not to the men, but to the beasts, and the words were not of his own tongue, but the primordial Words of Sol, words of balance and clemency. At the sound of his voice, the snarling ceased. The wolves, as if recognizing a higher authority, lowered their heads, turned away as one, and melted back into the forest as if they had been a dream.

The men, seeing this wonder, were struck dumb with terror and awe. They cast themselves upon the ground before him, weeping and confessing their crime. They brought forth the stolen book, which was in its full length written in the letter of the old Gisels, now stained with the blood of his brother Hermund. And Wiesurd, seeing their true repentance, did not condemn them but instead offered them the very teachings for which they had murdered. It was these men, his brother's killers and now his first disciples, who first spoke the name by which he would be known to all the Gisel people.

#### 1.6 About the Foundation of the *basilica* in Awavoordt and other miracles

Later the Apostle Wiesurd translated the remains of the martyr Hermund, or Harimundo in the oldest texts, to the ford of the Awans. There were two large bridges around the town of Awavoordt, as one might have already read from Bertramn of Ockarbeck, that the city is located on the confluence of the Awa and the Elsa. There in front of a bridge he established a little shrine to his brother and taught the converted men there of the words of Sol. He acted as a teacher of Gisel tongue but also the faith, which made many men, who were grateful of his guidance in many matters, devout disciples of Sol. They also called the place Verbrugge and therefore the Apostle Wiesurd of Verbrugge. There he acted as a professor and doctor, who taught and cured the illness of many.

At this time also a Himarian called Iaqub, and a Rutilian called Markis came to the place and helped Wiesurd to set up a school. They also to Rutilia and then came back with many books, letters and teachings of the other Apostles. But later a roaming band of the faithless Westmans attacked the two pious men and, O mighty Sol, they received the crown of martyrdom. Hearing this most saddening message, Wiesurd then came to the court of King Frotmund's court in Giselwiech. King Frodmund, who was not from the line of the three brothers but from a family of magnates from Oche, received him with many gifts. He petitioned him about how two subjects of him living in Awavoordt were murdered by the Westerners, which made the king furious and he immediately ordered the army to march west. The Westmen were expelled from Suderriech and henceforth the merchants could go peacefully along the road to the south.

Meanwhile, as the king destoryed the brigands utterly, a certain nobleman named Gundoberaht, the *Burgoaldor* of Awavoordt, who was a respected judge and a rich man possessing vast wealth from his estates, was moved by these events. Seeking the repose of his soul and wishing to honour the memory of the martyred Iaqub and Markis, he came before the Apostle Wiesurd. Also came with him were: Berenno, son of Heriminas; Fafiis, son of the martyr Markis, and many other good men. And they out of their reverence to the Apostle and the martyrs granted in perpetuity to the shrine of the Blessed Hermund the entirety of his ancestral estate at Monndorf, a fertile land rich in fields and woods, so that the school might be sustained there in their service to Sol, and a basilica be erected for the preachers.

At this time the fame of Wiesurd also reached the court of the the *burgawarden* Burgananths, who held a fortress in western Mayenau and trusted only in the strength of his arm and the sharpness of his axe. He commanded that the Apostle Wiesurd be brought before him in his great hall. When the Apostle arrived, the *burgazwarden*, showed him to a large hall in which many spears, helmets and armour-pieces taken from his enemies are stored. Then he boasted to the Apostle that he was able to beat a bull with one hand and had slain so many enemy that even Sol would be afraid of him. But the Apostle, looking the chieftain with scorn, replied: 'You boast of the men you have slain and believe you have made the divine afraid. But you have not made Sol afraid; you are not a power to be feared; you are a blight to be scoured. You stand in this hall of dead iron and believe it is a testament to your strength. I say to you it is the tomb you have built for your own line.' It is said that Burgananths, blind with fury, ordered his men to seize the Apostle, and carried him to his dungeons. But just as the guards carried the Apostle to the oubliette, a great cry arise from the courtyard and what followed was the clinging of blades and the horrible sound of violence. The brothers Ansuzhelm and Ansuwini, who were previously humiliated by Burgananths, came with a large force and rushed into the yard, as a large body of the guardsmen were carrying the Apostle to the dungeon. As the fighting raged, a torch was cast into the great hall, and the dry timbers of the roof caught fire. The fortress that was Burgananths' pride became his pyre of cremation. 

The Apostle Wiesurd, it is told, had walked from the hall untouched amidst the chaos, as if he were invisible to the fighting men, for he had delivered the divine message to the men: that the strength of men is but dust, and that a life built only on violence will, in the end, be consumed by it.

#### 1.7 About the early life of Waltuhari and the invasion of the Westmen

The son of Frodmund, Waltuhari, was also an ardent student of Wiesurd and a fierce warrior. His mother was Fastlinda, a woman of great wisdom and frequently taught her scions with great wisdom. When he was very young Frodmund named him as king, which was in practice common in the history, as many rulers also named their sons as kings to rule different regions. Waltuhari ruled over the region of Neustland, where he dutifully listened to the retainers and administered justice. According to Degeno, Waltuhari was most ardent in his pursuit towards the knowledge of Sol, but he, like many rulers from this era, began to adopt the name of Invincible Sol, especially when they marched their banners against the infidels. In the 936th year before the Intercalation, the king Waltuhari granted Wiesurd a very large piece of land in Giselwiech and honoured the new-founded *basilica* to the martyrs Jakob and Mark. From there, in a very short time, the old man converted the whole city with his words.

It was at this time the people of western Arkasia were greatly famed. The King Mantokos, who originally carried arms for Antenor the Younger, created his own kingdom of Portavia. He strove without respite to match his early triumphs and conquered many states. Frodmund and Mantokos exchanged their eldest sons to their respective courts to showcase their mutual friendship and respect, and promised to raise them into noble and courageous youths. Therefore Waltuhari came to the city Ferharvar of the Portavians while the prince Szarvas to Giselwiech. On the other hand Frodmund now relied on a certain Nordo to manage the region of Neustland. This caused him great trouble, because this Nordo was overthrown by the nobility. Eventually the king himself therefore moved to the city of Mette and requently traversed between Giselwiech and Mette. In Ferharvar met the young prince Etzel and befriended him greatly. The two young men outstripped all other Portavians and made Mantokos very proud. After the old king Frodmund died, Waltuhari returned to Giselwiech and then Szarvas returned to Ferharvar.

When Waltuhari returned to the kingdom, he found that the noblemen were rioting under a leader called Berenhard Berenhardsuno; he was supported by the following men: Ado of Tiefdorf, Fuhsbrand of Womers, and Arnipalths. He called upon his retinues and crushed the riot of Berenhard so compellingly that the circle of leaders who rioted against Nordo were all slain in the battle. He then replaced these men with the second-man of him when he ruled as the King in Neustland, whose name was Frithuward. But he also constantly travels around his realm and listened to the people, arbitrating their disputes and hearing their petitions. Thus he ruled strenuously and restored the order, which had failed since the old King's body ailed.

At this time the Westmen and the Melkthonians raised a large army to persecute the nations of Sol and conquer their people. These men originally came from the sea, perhaps from the Austrisola and Utica, but they pillaged all the way through the continent northwards into the land of Portavia, and then attacked the subjects of king Szarvas there. At first they operated in regions close to the coast, as they came sailing in their warships and thus no one were able to withstand them. They were called by various names, some called them Lukkans, some Gisraalites. After they landed they formed a large horde and carved out settlements, the others advancing into the hinterland. They constructed a castle called Siyon in Chalprela. Their leader, a man called Ur-Milki, also called Wanakas, is said to have been no limit in his overweening pride. He was the perpetrator of a long series of crimes, being under the influence, so they say, of his wicked mother, and now, as I have told you, he mobilized various infidel peoples, invaded Portavia and destroyed down to its very foundations every single building, which had been put up in ancient times. When he reached Weißburg, called Ferharvar in the local tongue, he set fire to the local granary and caused a great famine in this country. They also moved into many cities and enclosed its former residents into small blocks, killing them for fun and starving them by giving them little water and food.

Later a shepherd and Loquetor called Pheython, also called Sólyom by the locals, was found by these men when he was preaching among some hogherds and shepherds. This good shepherd was not willing to surrender his sheep to the wolves, and so the Westmen tried to force him to make sacrifices to Ellthonos. Pheython refused to do anything so foul and he made his revulsion clear. Then the Westmen beat him with sticks until he was thought to be dead. Within a few days Pheython died from the wounds of that beating. This terrible affair made the Portavians hugely enraged, and they sent for help against the Westmen to many nations. Moreover many of them volunteered to join the army of Etzel. Then Waltuhari led a force composed of Talbelanders and the Sunds to relieve his friend Etzel. 

But en route he was ambushed by the treacherous Sordish King Hludiger, who surrounded him with a large army of the Westemen. This Hludiger, who at first promised to help Waltuhari as a brotherly ruler, became frightened by the Westmen and promised he would be utmost pious and loyal to the cause of Ellthonos. Therefore he betrayed his oath and turned his back. He and his men quickly encircled Waltuhari and the vanguard. But their attempts to kill him failed many times, as Waltuhari and his companions fought valiantly. Then Waltuhari miraculously jumped out of the circle thanks to his horse Donarhuofos, who carried him into a feigned retreat and helped him picked off those who dared to pursue him one by one. Then the Rugil general Thorismund and prince Etzel also came to help him in the fight. Eventually the army overcame this ambush and marched against the Westmen.

#### 1.8 About the War against Ur-Milki and other infidels

After Hludiger's treachery failed, the King marched against Ur-Milki upon the field of Kastron. Etzel and Waltuhari attacked and routed the enemy they faced, but Szarvas attacked the forces of Ur-Milki himself but was defeated and killed. Then the Portavians became more furious than ever and they pressed on with great determination, instilling the hearts of the Westmen with such fear, that they immediately turned around and fled. After the battle the Portavians hailed Etzel king and carried him upon their shields.

Then the army pursued the enemy towards the Samander. According to Bátor of Siófalva, before the second battle was joined, the leader Napas led the vanguard to attack the enemy. Then, when Ur-Milki heard this, he attacked the vanguard, dispersed them and captured a certain shieldman. He then interrogated the rustic man: 'Is the Great Barbarian (*Barbaros Megas*) himself here? How large are his troops?' The man replied: 'The Great Barbarian indeed comes, his army is so strong that you cannot resist.' Hearing this, Ur-Milki was instantly stricken by horror and ordered his troops to cross the river and find a better ground to defend. But the army of Waltuhari and Etzel crossed the river attacked with such great ferocity, that Ur-Milki was routed a second time. According to the traditions, this Ur-Milki is a very alcoholic man since his youth. And this time, as like before any other battle, he drank furiously and rode on a smaller horse to fight. After his army was utterly defeated, his mind was still blurred by the spirits and his horse fell into a ditch. A soldier called Helmnaud thus came after him and speared him to death. After the leader was killed, the Phosphorists besieged and utterly destroyed Siyon, killing all Westmen inside and burning all their false icons and vestments into ashes. Hence the Lukkans or Gisraalites were never known again in any history. Therefore the Invasion of the Westmen came to an end.

After the battle, the army then marched a long way into Arkasia. They attacked the king Diegram and his Melkthonian allies there. They besieged the town of Tuscha with great force and attacked it with ladders. But afterwards they heard the king Parkot led a great force north, intending to relieve the town. Then Etzel and Waltheri called to their men, that they should be prudent and not be provoked by the enemies, as they were now impetuous and eager to battle; instead they ordered the leaders to arrange the troops into solid formations and wait for the enemy to attack. But the Red Portavians and the Sundars were very impetuous and their leaders Geza and Ernust rode against them with a portion of light cavalry. Parkot charged them with the *Kataphrakter* and easily destroyed their forces. The two kings therefore had to lift the siege. At this time the leader of the Haikids called Ardast came with a band of men, who carried forth with them a banner of Phoster Haikos on a ox-laden cart. The Phosphorians were greatly inspired by this and attacked fiercely. Eventually they routed the men of Parkot and Diegram and conquered the town of Tuscha. Hitherto no Ellthonians were found in the country of Arkasia, not even during the Intercalation. The leader Ardast then advised the two kings to march into Chalprela and conquer the Anthrolatory cities there. This affair took them some further years without much progress, because the Chalprelans and the Tirekans were still very strong. Therefore they returned to their home country and disbanded their forces.

#### 1.9 About the *Waldand*

After Waltuhari ruled peacefully many years, the princes elected him as the highest king, called *Wegawiso* or later *Giselwaltand*, because they deemed him worthy of knowing the way of governing the state or wielding the power to protect all Gisels. He also established a system of ranks accordingly. I shall briefly treat this topic using Charamundas' notes on these offices. The first among them were accordingly called the *furisto* (*vürste*). Waltuhari ordered that these men should reside around his palace in Giselwiech and attend the assembly frequently. The men following them were called the *exairetari*, a name taken from the Thalassaran word for that which is 'chosen' or 'set apart', also called *frigomo*, who each received their own lands from the *furisto* because they helped him to magistrate, to govern, to exercise law, and to serve in his retinue and courts, especially as their lords were absent. Then there were the *degan*, who were the servants of the *furisto* or the lesser men. Waltuhari also granted the *furisto* rights to fortify their provinces against the Ellthones. Thereafter he also divided the people into four castes, who are the soldiers, the farmers, the workers and the merchants.

He also in his own lands appointed the *garafio*, which means those who carry out decrees. The *garafio* then appointed their *liud* and *gisindi* to the various settlements and governed there as the *sculdehaiz*. In return of these benefits, the men were to pay him tribute, participate in his justice and his campaigns. As nothing could unite them into one political body but the observance of common laws and customs, the king called upon four old men, called Wisogast, Ewaberaht, Adalrehht, and Gitatrahhari, who were from Widomne, Hadulomne and Wolgonold, and they helped them to have laws, so that those who esteemed the Gisels may live under these decrees, and according to the will of Sol may the Kingdom (*Kuningdom*) be filled with the sensation and light of Its grace, the army protected, the fields bountiful, and the lives with joys of love and times of happiness. To prevent quarrels and promote peace, the wise men and the notables argued that all should be subjected to legal authority. Especially that those who refused to be summoned to court shall be liable to pay in kind or pentadrachm. The king also picked from the notables who to wield the sword of legal authority and carry out his peaceful intentions. After these matters have been settled, they also compiled a book about cultivating the field, and the king ordered it to be copied and sent to the *basilicae*, because he deemed that the Phosphorians were the first to be able to read properly. 

He also appointed *Hofgarafio* in Reudiwiek, Giselwiech and the city of the Awans, Awafurd, so that the kingdom will have three capitals. The *vürste* them proclaimed the Gisels should have a king, just like the Thalassarans have a Basileos and the Rutilians with their Kings or Consuls, and that the original ruler of the Gisels was called a judge, also called *kriter*, but now as his dominion grow, he needed a bigger title. And therefore Waltuhari and the men raised his son Sigomund as co-king and made the men pledge to be loyal to him and his son Sigomond. Therefore he established an order in the kingdom which lasted for a long time.

#### 1.10 On the Invasion and Settlement of the *Borealoi* in Parmenia

But at this time the men Hilderiks, Gumohilths and Ranemer, who were the sons of *furisto* Ranosuinths; and the brothers Hiltigis and Argebard, the former a *saio* and the latter a *gardingar*, rebelled so that they can divide the land of Neustland and Rugiland and appropriate them for their plot. It is also said that these men were not willing to pay their tributes to the king because they deemed the king neither protected them nor created peace for them, instead they trusted in their own strength, their swords and their forts. They frequently caused fictions and did not appear when the King summoned them to an assembly. At first, the king sent the generals Hugifridu and Matto to attack the rebels, but they delayed on the road so long that the enemy took their chance and ambushed the army. The two leaders, as well as many palatine officials, were killed in the battle. Thereafter Hilderiks operated freely, until the king himself came and defeated them in many skirmishes.

These men, while still hoarding their strengths with large bands of followers, went into more of a migration with their people, at that time is said to have been 200,000 of them, men and women, young and old, fighters and farmers, all added together. Initially they ravaged Markia, and then these people moved into Portavia, but they were afraid of king Etzel, so went to Chaenia and caused great turbulence to the Chaenians. They extortionated the local cities and petty rulers, thus acquiring many wealth. At this time Hilderiks was thinking of settleing down in Chaenia, but soon he heard that the King himself mobilised a large host to attack him, so he fled further south into western Laoelia and then Agothia. These people called themselves the *Helidens* but by the Dorians *Borealoi*, the Northmen. The Borealoi then ravaged Agothia and the ports of Ortesia, Zennonika and Larisa.

Eventually they set their eyes upon the city of Thalassara. At first Thelamon, the Basileus of the Thalassarans, decided to pay these men 1,400 pounds of gold so that they would not ravage the Agothian lands. After Hilderiks received the gold, he ordered his men to resume his plunder, but this decision was refuted by Hiltigis and Argebard, who instead were employed by Thelamon to attack Hilderiks. But their attack failed and the two men were both killed, what was left of these men were settled down back in Chaenia, with Gainas their new leader. It was at this time that king Waltuhari collected a host comprised of hardened warriors and attacked this band of Hilderiks, dispersing them again and forcing them to flee all the way west until they reached northern Parmenia. This feat was lauded by the Basileus Thelamon, who called Waltuhari hitherto *koinonos* and *filos*; he also granted him 10,000 Pentadrachm for his service and the title of *Archon*; moreover later he [Thelamon] also gave him the name Antiochos, which is a name his family used, not related to the conqueror Antiochos the magnificent, as came later than Waltuhari, and henceforce the leader of the Gisels was called by the name of *Antioker Waldand*.

On the road Hilderiks and his brothers were killed in a mutiny, and the soldiers soon quarrelled and separated into two groups, the Swesonians, led by Landiberaht, and the Bernians, led by Berenwildi. The two smaller groups then invaded northern Parmenia, where at this time was settled by Bothonians. They expelled them and settled in the town called Eidenburg, where they swore an oath with the Syonese and befriended with them so that they will defend their borders from the Bothonians, also called the *Blaofari* because the frequently used blue paints on their faces. Later Berenwildi also established a new fortress called Bannburg, because this castle marked the country under his *bann*; I also read from the *Grandes Chroniques de Parmenie* that the name came from Berenwildi himself, so it should be Bernburg in the first place. And many years laters these people were absorbed into the Parmenians and these castles are now called Edinbourg and Banbourg, the former also called *Dunn Ead* by the residents of Blaovagne.

#### 1.11 The *basilica* in Nordeck

One of the disciples of Wiesurd went to the city of Nordeck and set up a school there to taught people the ways to make use of *Phos* wisely. At first, only a few believed him. These illuminated became the first aspirants of the Words of Sol, as they were taught the three arts and were given instructions to study, to observe and to celebrate the rites of the Almighty Sol. As after they built the school they wished day by day to build an basilica, so they asked a townsman and to a pit-house which was originally used as a gathering of hunters. They did not obtain the use of the house for which they had asked; and they therefore went to see a man called Leudegar, the leading *furisto* of the Nordegau, who was also a son-in-law of the aforementioned Gondobert. They told him of their Phosphorist faith and explained what they wanted. ‘If my own house, he replied, ‘which I possess in Nordeck, were worthy of being put to such a use, I would be willing to offer it to you.’ When they heard him they fell at his feet. They said that his hall was indeed suitable for all sort of preaching and ceremonies with a public congregation, for which they offered him 500 Pentadrachm, together with a gold salver. Leudegar accepted three of the golden coins for luck and refused the rest. Up to this moment he had believed in Ellthonist, but now he became a Phosphorist and turned his house into an basilica. This is now the most important church in the town of Nordeck, constructed with great skill and famous for the relics of Hermund, the first martyr of the Gisels.

#### 1.12 The foundation of Trufer

The city of Trufer had its first loquetor in Fridugis. He had been converted from a family bonded to the king himself. He was a married man and, according to the custom of the *ekklesia*, his wife lived as a religious, apart from her husband. They both devoted themselves to prayer, charity and good works. At first they only found a half-ruined manor with some inhabitants, he built therefore a *basilica* single-mindedly and brought glory to this place. In this restoration, the wonderful power of Sol is shown. For, when they were cutting fir trees amongst the craggy rocks in the heart of the forest in out-of-the- way places, the trunks which had been cut elsewhere and those cut there, which fell inconveniently, blocked the access for carts. There was one trunk of incredible size which thirty or forty men could scarcely carry on level ground. The holy man coming to it with two or three [men], as the path of the hard track allowed, placed the immense weight of the trunk on his back and on those of his companions. And, whereas before they could scarcely advance with ease because of the difficulty of the way, they soon quickly walked with the burden of the oppressing trunks so that, counter-intuitively, those bearing loads went rejoicing on their way (as if the trunks were being carried by others) with steady steps and with all the ease of ramblers. The holy man seeing that he was receiving such great assistance, urges his companions joyfully to complete the work they had begun and, having received reassurance, to determine to remain in that desert. He affirms that this is Sol’s will. And so he restores the gable roof of the temple, and the ruined walls, and he begins to build what else is needed for the basilica.

He was a man of such remarkable holiness and impeccable virtue, and his sanctity was so clear for all to see, that his fame reached lands outside Trufer. As a loquetor he also sponsored many buildings to be built and a wooden palisade be set up around the church, dedicated to the missionary Thomas of Rhotae, which is called Thomasberg. On the foot of the hill, there were many farmsteads along the Morser. The loquetor and the syndic (*sundik*) Irmingild then organised the townsmen to enclose also this part, called Gartenfuß today.

As the city was growing, the leaders carried out an extension of its walls in various directions an increase due rather to the anticipation of its future population than to any present overcrowding. There they also set up a large field and invited many freemen and slaves to move in and cultivate the fields. Fridugis also set up a church dedicated to Phoster Wiesurd in this district. Fridugis lived, so the story goes, to be a very old man, full of days and full of good works. When he had completed his life’s journey, he died peacefully and went off to join Sol. He was buried in a crypt in the ala of Phoster Thomas. After the death of this saintly Loquetor Fridugis so many miracles were performed at his tomb that it is not possible to record them or even to remember them. He was succeeded by Fulgerscalk.

#### 1.13 The rule of Sigomund and his death

In the 908th year before the Intercalation, King Waltuhari died from a stroke when he was walking in his gardens. He was succeeded by Sigomund, who was not particularly a wise ruler. He spent more time with his mistresses, hunting stags and boars, drinking wildly, rather than spending time with his *garafio* and the powerful men of the realm. But conversely out of his lavish habits, he patronised many artisans to create many brooches, jewels carved in bones, and all other decorations, which then he sold to other nobilities around the country. It is said that he collected many tollage by doing so. He also employed men from Thalassara, Ortesia and Larissa to study their arts. In his absence his brother Hludawig and the *Hofgarafio* Rikmann ruled the realm and dealt with all other affairs, so that at least things went on without much trouble.

From time to time he drank wildly with his subjects and humiliated them in their names. Then one day a man from northern Talbeland called Rudo went to see the king, who was at that time wasting the gold of his father in lavish decorations and lascivious affairs. The man Rudo, originally wanting to petition him for a recognition in his farmsteads, instead out of his personality of upholding moral standards rebuked what he saw: 'You ruler, how can you dispense more your bodily eagerness than justice? How can you not listen to the people but to this horrible horde of lecherous men and women?' Then Sigomund became enraged and drew his sword, severely wounding Rudo and ordered him to be thrown out of his palace, and Rudo died on the second day. This made the Talbelanders enraged and they revolted in Giselwiech, with the judge Markogisal and Wulfoald as their leader, which forced Sigomund to flee from the city. But then Markogisal and Wulfoald co-ruled the city for three months, they quickly fell out with each other and cannot reach consensus on any subject, therefore they decided to invited the King batle. Therefore Sigomund promised he would act as a proper ruler and the people allowed him to return. And he dared not to punish these men because, for all these things he did, he is more of a man who indulges himself in every aspect of life, instead of being a tyrant. But later because of their disputes both Markogisal and Wulfoald became infamous among the citizens and they lost their position as the judge.

But Sigomund was still apprehensive about the more boring parts of his life. One day he doubted the loyalty of Rikmann and removed him from the court. Rikmann died in horror and great frustration about this negligence. Before his death he said to many: 'This cannot last long.' After hearing this Sigomund became hugely relieved, as he thought this was a clear proof that Rikmann was secretly planning sinister things to him. Equally he removed Hludawig from his position and sent him to Mayenau as a local ruler. Instead Sigomund surrounded him with a band of luxurious and wasetful noblemen, who shared a similar life with him, therefore deemed by him as talkable friends. Later, Sigomund became very annoyed of the horde of concubines in his palace and went out hunting with a band of noblemen. After they hunted a boar and drank a lot, they became quite irritated of one another, perhaps because they quarrelled over how to part the boar and who should get the tusks and the hide, and fought violently with swords. Sigomund was struck in his head with a sword by a certain *gisindi* called Gihantari, and he died on the spot. But the noblemen were so drunk that they didn't realised what happened, and they continued brawling until the day became very dark. It was only the second day that they found out the king was killed, therefore they became very afraid and had Gihantari killed. Then they carried the bodies of the dead men back to Giselwiech. This happened in the year 903 AI.

#### 1.14 The rule of Hludawig, and the vase of Teenmont

After Sigomund died, the state is troubled by the fact that, despite having a dozen children, none of them was born to his wife Adelindis. His younger brother Hludawig was therefore elected by many as the new ruler. When he arrived from Neustland, the palatine followers and the Gisels all came to receive him. His first act was to remove the horde of evil men and women in the palace, sending them either to faraway places or confiscated what they seized unlawfully. He also instructed the craftsmen to produce less jewelry and more arts depicting the Authority of Sol. But Sigomund's eldest son Prantagild, disgruntled, escaped to Angern, where he allied himself with the Faleners and moreover accepted their depraved custom of anthrotheism, so that he can venerate a certain face of Ellthonos called Wigaz, which he deemed might help him win the battle. Moreover he provoked many men that in fact Sigomond only named Hludawig as the regent and that he himself is indeed the true Waltand. His claims deceived many but also prompted many to join Hludawig, because they themselves would rather not see the son of the decadent Sigomund rule the country. Nevertheless, Prantagild then brought his army towards the Dietbrugge against the men of Hludawig.

Meanwhile Hludawig vowed that he will not cut his hair if the realm is still troubled by affairs within and without. He then called up the Mayeners and the Ripoarians to help him in the upcoming battle against Prantagild. Then a battle was joined and Prantagild was killed. His brothers were also killed by the order of Hludawig. The other Wigites resisted his advance fiercely. On the year 899 AI, he attacked and defeated the Sustfaleners in Minne. He ordered 600 of their nobles and chieftains to be beheaded publicly while the others were moved to Giselwiech as slaves. 

After the battle, the soldiers had stolen an ewer of great size and wondrous workmanship, gifted to the Faleners by Prantagild, who acquired it from the workshops his father established, together with many other precious objects used in the alal service. The loquetor of the church in Sustfalen in question sent messengers to the King to beg that, even if he would not hand back any of the other sacred vessels, this ewer at least might be restored to the church. The King listened to them and replied: ‘Follow me to Teenmont, where all the objects which we have seized are to be distributed. If this vessel for which your bishop is asking falls to my share, I will meet his wishes.’ They came to Teenmont and all the booty was placed in a heap before them. King Hludawig addressed his men and wanted the vase to be added to his share. They listened to what he said and the more rational among them agreed. As they spoke one of their number, a man called Wodanager, greedy and prompt to anger, raised his battle-axe and struck the ewer. ‘You shall have none of this booty,’ he shouted, ‘except your fair share.’ All present were astounded at his words. Then the man struck with his mace the ewer with such force that it gone into pieces. The King became enraged and became very resentful. Some time later in the year he ordered all of his warriors be paraded in front of him. When he came to Wodanager, he rebuked him that his javelins, axe and sword are in such a terrible condition, that he ordered him to lay them on the ground and check them. After the soldier bent forward to check the weapon, Hludawig suddenly raised his battle-axe in the air and splited the man's skull and declared: 'Thus you did to the vase at Teenmont!' As the man fell dead the king dismissed the other soldiers.

The wars in Angern continued as the King Hludawig repeatedly attacked them and their leader Grifo Wiposuno. Grifo, after Prantgild's rebellion, controlled Reudiwiek and a vast swath of land north of the Taunen. Grifo then pleaded help from Suidger Osgersuno, his brother-in-law and the ruler of Magenland, who complied and betrayed Hludawig. They attempted to block his route of retreat in a valley, but then the King moved faster and escaped. Henceforth this placed is called Hilthal. Hludawig became increasingly resentful to this betrayal, as he sent the prince of the Neustlanders, Arnolf Arnandsuno, to attack Magenland with a large force. Arnolf devastated the region and brutally destroyed the town of Ohren. Afterwards Suidger and his men mixed with the foragers in the Talbelander camp and dressed up in a similar way, so that they might enter the camp. It was the 22th hour of the day and the soldiers were mostly half-awake. So they were caught off-guard and a multitude of them were killed in this treachery. But then the men who were awaken or remained vigilant fought valiantly and drove them out of the camp. In this battle both Suidger and Arnolf were killed. Hearing this, the King fell upon the Magens with another army and inflicted on them equally a great defeat. He took much hostages from the Magens and so much tribute from them, that the Magens were forced to buy many cattle from Littland and Mayenau with many gold and silver. 

Thereafter the King resolutely pursued a policy of destroying all obstructing forces around the capital by replacing them with those who were loyal to him. He used many tricks and many pretexts to destroy these lords one by one. The most easiest one and the only peaceful one was the subjugation of Hludalths Domuriksuno, who surrendered his *vurstdum* to the King, then being rewarded a place in his retinue and later he was called Hludalths the Sensible. The King then moved to Hammaland and conquered Hammo, killing the lord Ragnachar there and replaced instead a prince he named, called Adalhelm. With the help of Adalhelm and his son Hrodgaud, he eventually conquered Grifonen and Angern, setting up new districts there. Moreover he also revoked the clientship of the Vinnans. The chief among the Vinnans, Markomer, was replaced by Amalariks, son of Thiutriks. Then Hludawig also marched against a Charariks Wertosuno. This Charariks, who rules upper Talbeland, treacherously refused to sent his contingents when the Angerns rebelled, remaining neutral so that he might offer the hand of friendship to whichever leader was victorious. This was the reason why Hludawig now attacked him in his wrath. He hemmed Charariks in by some stratagem and made him prisoner. Then he killed the man and his son when they were begging his forgiveness. He also conquered northwestern Elsenland, ruled by a certain Ricihari Adualdsuno. Hludawig provoked Frotolf, the borther of Ricihari, to seize his position, and then attacked and killed Frotolf on the pretext of infidelity. Therefore the aforementioned regions around Talbeland were subdued violently. By doing so Hludawig most forcefully asserted his controls to many other regions previously Waltuhari offered the title of *vurste* but was not able to control.

#### 1.15 The Translation of Phoster Januarius

After Fulgerscalk, a man from the town called Hloderiks assumed the position as loquetor. At this time the King Hludawig sent Hloderiks to Rutilia to visit the tomb of Phoster Januarius, whose skull he translated back to Trufer. The holy relic performed many wonderful miracles and many people from the towns around Trufer all flocked to the city to see the blessed Apostle of the Rutilians. After the death of Hloderiks a man called Euthemios took the position, who governed wisely long throughout the reign of Hludawig and his son Radwin. These were the third and the fourth loquetors of Trufer.

#### 1.16 On Antiochos Batrachos

It was at this time, namely, the 878th year before Intercalation, that the conqueror Antiochos Batrachos set sail from Kephatheia and began his conquest of the various Dorianic kingdoms. He allied with the Ortesians and then went head on to attack these regions violently. Moreover he also sent armies across the Ikarian Sea and conquered the Rutilians and the Dorian colonies there alike. Antiochos, who famously always carried a frog onto the battlefield, was called with two cognomens. One is Megaloprepís, which means the magnificent; the other Batrachos, meaning the frog. He then pursued further west all the way against the Bothonians and the Parmenians and the Ialmarians alike, defeating them all in pitched battles. No one had conquered so much more before and never will after, so that the deeds of Antiochos Batrachos indeed remained unimaginable to many of us. He further set up many satrapies and governates around these various nations and used the previous Thalassaran colonies as bases of operation. Among these places the most famous was Parthenope, the city of Nikator the Builder; also Nikaea, called Nizza nowadays; and Baŕkenopolis, called Barchinuna nowadays.

Antiochos' ambition grew as he also launched wars against the Uticans and the Aramaic cities, called by them the land of Thermomeia, the heated land; but his attacks were more of a failure because these states possessed a very strong fleet. However, he still managed to rule the city called Norra and Parthonion with a large fleet. But then he appealed help from the Kemetians, who ruled the costal area south of the Mathon Isthmus. The Kemetians obliged his appeal and sent him many riders on camel and swift horsemen. With an army assembled, Antiochos attacked Utica again and eventually conquered the city with force. But he allowed them to remain as Ellthonians. Thereafter the Dorians also settled in the continent Thermomeia, more often called Apriconia nowadays. 

Some years later he further went south into continental Apriconia, allied himself with the Arzavashians in Media-Apriconia and went to conquer the equatorial lands called Baglam. But there his army met a great pestilence and he left the general Meneandros to deal with the locals while returning to his home country. After his conquests he ruled peacefully for many years. Then when Antiochos became old, that is when he was 76, he parted up his kingdom to his sons. His older son Demetrios acquired the eastern part of the country, while the younger son Heliophilos acquired the western part. Therefore I shall call them each the Kingdom of Thalassara and the Kingdom of Parthenope, based on their respective capitals. At first the brothers remained peaceful, but then they contended violently against one another over many matters.

#### 1.17 On the *Diadochoi* of Antiochos and Maizaniis

As the two sons of Antiochos grew old, not long after the death of their father, they also each passed away. Demetrios' son Antigonos ruled Thalassara, while Heliophilos left no sons so his satraps contended fiercely against one another in this crisis. On the other hand Antigonos was preoccupied by the Valzs and the Melkthonians who kept their independence from the easter coast into the mountains. The Uticans first rosed under the general Hanno and destroyed all traces of Phosphorism alltogether, enslaving all believers of Sol and re-established the rule of Ellthonos and Dolzzanos' the Thermomeians established a league of city states; the Ciburnians elected Luvkis Dekiis, son of Silviis, as their consul; the general Petros established a kingdom on the Ialmaric Isles.

At this time, the Campanians elected the general Maizaniis to lead them. He defended Parthenope and other Lucanian cities with great ferocity. Maizaniis employed many men in his service, including a Sundrian leader called Nikolaos, son of Theutwin. According to the *Historai* by Kassis Vebiis, Nikolaos, whom he called 'a certain Prankishman', served the forces of Maizaniis diligently and fought against the Ciburnians for many times. By Prankishman, the Campanians means a Gisel or man speaking the Theudonic tongue, as they deemed the Gisels excelled in the use of throwing spears (*Phramm*). This event was also recorded by Degeno, who asserted that Nikolaos was at first a mercenary serving the Portavians, and some years later he went to Rutilia and was employed by Maizaniis. The Son of Maizaniis is Polideukaes, who was a fair and just ruler. Moreover he established the Church of Invincible Sol in the 801th year before the Intercalation. I shall treat this matter further later.

#### 1.18 The Rule of Polydeukes

King Phoster Polydeukes was indeed a wonderous person both in his character and in his deeds. He ate not lavishly but a combination of fruits, leaves and meat; he preferred the mildness of water instead of alcohol; he wore a hair shirt and constantly consulted scholars and speakers in his life. For he himself established houses to offer porridge and grain to the poor and the sick, while he himself wore a hair shirt in his privy rooms; he established the first ever hospital, under the name of Phoster Ianuarius; he expanded the walls of Parthenope and encouraged his subjects to trade around the Cardial Sea; he patronised and founded schools to spread the Words of Sol and encourage the exploration of Phos; he also lowered the taxes when the realm became more peaceful and his enemies subdued. He was most ardent in his piety and faith, indeed a holy king, an exemplar to all Phosphorists alike. 

He also performed many other duties most strenuously. He was very concerned about the coverage of schools and *basilicae* not only in cities but also in the countryside, for the rustic folks and the farmers, so that he, after consulting the Loquetor Viktorinis of Parthenope, decreed that from the day [796 AI] on the loquetorate should be divided into *parokiai* and any village that has more than 100 inhabitants should now have a chorloquetor. This reformed indeed helped him to spread the Words of Sol further into the districts much more effective than before.

When his father Maizaniis died, the Campanian kingdom ruled still southern Rutilia not without trouble. Indeed the Thalassarans often assailed them with fleets and armies which they thought might be enough to conquer Pula and Lucania; in the north the Rutilian peninsula was in chaos. The Ciburnians were frequently troubled by the Lemnovenes and the Bothonians, who frequently attacked southwards into Rutilia, sacking Toutanish and Dorian cities alike. The Venites and Tremans in *Mediapaeninsula* were mostly unruly. Indeed right after he [Polydeukes] ascended onto the throne, the Hatricornes and the Bothonians invaded Ciburia and killed their leader Fremaistos, son of Houvos. Then they conquered Resunkia and destoryed the capital city of the Ciburnians. Then, according to Trefoniis Puifis, son of Luvkis:

> At that time, the Bothonian leader Eburonicus invaded the Toutanish cities on the Syonese coast. He first sacked Amperlo and then attacked Rivaltum, before then moving against Parvenium. Many of the inhabitants were slaughtered and they ravaged the most fertile areas. Terrified by such atrocity, many other cities, like Epikrotea and Lassadium therefore appealed to Polydeukes. Polydeukes immediately mobilised his forces and expelled the Bothonians in a battle near Rhemtos, where 80,000 Bothonians were killed. He also dispatched a *socius extraordinarius* called Radagosius to reinforce the Ciburnians. These people acted bravely and dutifully, just as the names *Francus* and *Giselus* shown, and repelled the Bothonians with great ferocity

These were also attested by Degeno, who says that royal leaders of the Gisels were often called by the Rutilians Franks, because they thought they were brave, responsible in service, and used throwing-spears very well. He also recorded a general called Radagast, who, according to the tradition in Sordland, served first the Ciburnians and then Campanians, and thereafter he went to the Ialmarian Isles and served there. His son, called Regino, or by the Campanian name Antonius Radagasianus, was a legate of the general Epetos Oustiou of Nizza, who was later defeated by Polydeukes the Just in a rebellion.

Now, after he pacified the north, Polydeukes, unlike any other kings in his age, called the clergymen from all across the continent into a large council in the city of Parthenope. This is because indeed the large Phosphorian empire created by Antiochos faded and the Phosphorians were persecuted by various peoples - namely the Bothonians and the Uticans. He urged the men to be united with the sacred cause of Sol, of spreading Its words, and to root out the obstruction of Ellthonists. There the all other loquetors, more than 150 of them, discussed all sorts of matter. There they established that there should be a formal church in the name of Invincible Sol, and there should be a system of speakers mediating regionally in the advise of local loquetors, whom they decided to call Archiloquetor. They furthermore established that chancery Lucanian should be the liturgical language in honour of Polydeukes the King, but the Arkasian, Leodarisc and Thalassaran tongue, where the earliest apostles had already used their native language to preach, may retain their own languages parallel to Lucanian in all rites.

Polydeukes also conquered the whole of Rutilia after many years of campaigning. But after his death he partitioned the kingdom into two parts for his two sons: Alekandris obtained Nikaea and Kaisar obtained Parthenope. Henceforth there existed two states on the Rutilian peninsula, which laster for many years. Only after the rule of Carlus Augustus the peninsula was restored into one state.

#### 1.19 About the First Jihad

At this time a Himarian leader called Almunder ibn Shamsharah. His great-grandfather was called Yuhamin, who was a companion and a *Kliwanarier* of the Basileos Antiochos. After he conquered many lands with the great ruler, he acquired a piece of land and settled down in the fortress of Kufah. But his descendants became poor and in his early life Almunder worked as a labourer and sold to many his weaved turbans. But after the Uticans rose up, he first met a certain rich nomad and merchant called ibn Yamin, who was eager to destroy these false Ellthonists and restore the rule of Phosphorism. He also met a certain man called Amr ibn Yuhanim, who previously lived in the city of Ithoqart but became a fugitive after he feuded and killed a Ellthonist. These three men made an oath under a date tree to treat each other like brothers, and that they were eager to do great things to serve the Omnipotent, which is their way to call Sol. They first enlisted under the chieftain of Kufah, Abu Kamil'din with a hundred of their volunteers, but this Abu Kamil'din was more persuaded by petty feuds. Moreover when he dispatched the three men to a task, he also sent with them a lieutenant, who utterly humiliated them by calling them *gyrovagi* and peasants. This made b. Yamin very angry and he beat up the lieutenant with sticks, the would so grave that this man died the other day.

Therefore the three men faced a dilemma, as now they have killed an adjunct of this Abu Kamil'din. At first they became fugitives with some followers. But afterwards another leader called Abd'adil accepted them into his army, and through the process of attacking the Uticans they acquired great prestige and honour. They plundered their caravans and their oasis towns and moreover they raided even their garrison outposts. This made Gershtart, the King of Ithoqart very angry, and he sent his finest general Hannibal with a cabal of Arkasian mercenaries led by Uahan to destroy him. But this army encountered a large sandstorm and their camp was raided by the men of Almunder, this caused a great confusion among them and both Hannibal and Uaham were killed. Abd'adil therefore trusted him very much and adopted him as his son, so after Abd'adil died the men elected him as the new ruler of the city Marqaban. With the support of the Marqabaners, Almunder attacked and destroyed Abu Kamil'din's forces, because his followers believed that Almunder was able to do greater service to the Invincible Sol. Therefore they overthrew Abu Kamil'din and elected Almunder as the ruler of Kufah as well.

Now ruling the two cities, Almunder accumulated enough power and soldiers and he declared that he intended to strive for the belief of Invincible Sol, hence a Jihad should be launched against the city of Ithoqart with the greatest of ferocity. When he marched towards the aforementioned city, a certain man called Nurshamash and a number of Utican Phosphorists also joined his army. These men called themself a *Hiera Taxis* as they were militia of Sol rebelling against Ellthonism. With the forces combined, he delivered speeches and encouraged the soldiers to fight bravely. He attacked the city and, with the local king called Gerashtart killed in the battle, the Himarians achieved a great victory as they were the first nation to launch a holy war against the Uticans after the fall of the empire of Antiochos Batrachos. This conquest was also remembered as the first Jihad or the first Aithofery in all of histories.

#### 1.20 The Rule of Hlodorecht

After Hludawig quelled the regions with force, his son Hlodorecht succeeded his position, which is the 879th year before the Intercalation. Hlodorecht at first gathered many of the *vursten* around his palace. But at this point the leader of the palace guard, Gaisamer, was a proud man who controlled all access to the king. This made him very angry and he secretly planned together with a band of his youthful friends. one day he called Gaisamer into the palace with the pretext of rewarding him. But when Gaisamer heard that the gold and the land offered to him did not satisfy his appetite, he angrily drew the sword and claimed loudly that he was humiliated. The King, seeing this, also drew his sword and loudly declared Gaisamer a traitor. Gaisamer instantly attacked with brute force, but his sword hit the collonade on the right side of the throne, while at the same time the men hiding in corners appeared and overwhelmed Gaisamer and his followers. After this Hlodorecht reclaimed the control over the palace. 

Then he also marched against the treachery of Gaudo Amalariksuno, who conspired with Pippin of Neisen and Hludlaik and annexed the nearby *vurstendom* of Merwold. These people acted with great credulity and refused to comply with the king's demand of returning the properties. Despite being knocked down his horse, the force of Hlodorecht prevailed and the leaders of this rebellion surrendered. While the others made an oath and passed an ordeal to show their determination, Gaudo refused to find any compurgator and resisted violently the soldiers, as a result he and his followers were killed. But Hlodorecht immediately said that the family of Gaudo shall be forgiven and he had their properties returned and secured as before the rebellion.

At this time one particular man called Weizilo of Ruhridorf rose to a position of great importance out of his own competence. Weizilo, who was born to a family of *degan* holding a tenancy from the court, at first was known to Hlodorecht as his mother was also the young prince's wet nurse. Because of this convenience he also studied with the prince and served as his bodyguard very early on. After he reached manhood, he first served as his *gisindi* and then his estate-manager in eastern Talbeland. And indeed he performed his duty competently, therefore the trust upon him increased day by day, therefore he was further promoted to the position of basilicae advocate throughout the whole region of Ruhren. So that after Hlodorecht ascended, he clearly favoured Weizilo despite his lowly born.

This, however, became a source of trouble as the nobility became jealous of Weizilo. They moreover resented that he dispensed justice according to the law instead of in their favour. So the head of them Wichmann Bernhardsuno of Heideltal, accused him of treason and demanded that he should be instantly deprived all honour. But the King refused to comply and, out of his cautiousness, increased the guards of the palace to keep assaulters out. Then, on the Winter Solstice of 874th year [A.I.], Wichmann conspired with the noblement Amalrich Thiutrichsuno, Winither Torgersuno, Hadubrand Purchardsuno and Ricco Riccosuno, as they intended to use Winither's position as the royal cup-beared to open the gate of the palace and violently murder Weizilo. This conspiracy was then related to the King and Weizilo by Hadubrand's brother Liudegar, and therefore Weizilo and his men ambushed the armed nobles in the palace and killed them altogether.

But after Weizilo cleared off his path to power, he indeed became more and more ambitious. He invented the title of *hofmann* and seemingly grasped all executive power into his hand. He managed not only the justice but also the finance, personnel and management of the royal palace. But he was also a very generous person, as he frequently distributed wealth to the populace, funded *alas* and schools, and he lessened the rent on fiscal lands. But out of his ability of naming capable administrators and cutting unnecessary spending, for he introduced the title of *oikonomer* who managed the chamber of royal wealth and supplies, thus separating the power from the *hofgrave*. He also wrote many tracts which advised Weizilo on the offices of the palace and what they ought to perform. He indeed helped the king to accumulate so much wealth that none preceding him had witnessed such many gold and silver.

After Weizilo died out of a sudden fever in 862 [A.I.], Hinkmar Hariwigsuno of Reuss was appointed as the new *oikonomer*. When the King himself discussed with him some of his ideas about reforming the household, as Degeno recorded, the following conversation happened:

> Hinkmar replied to him that: 'Lord Hlodorecht, if I am to ask, how might you compare yourself with the late King Waltuhari?' The King replied that he was indeed inferior to Waltuhari; Thus Hinkmar said: 'In the same way as I am not as adequate as lord Weizilo, therefore I think we are not in the position of changing the offices and rules made by the two famous men preceding our position. We should instead strive most eagerly to follow their examples and preserve their ingenuity.' And the King indeed accepted his suggestion.

But the king did order to abolish the office of *Hofmann*. In the mean time the King also employed Fromafulc of Guusdam as his court-speaker. Fromafulc, who was born in Awavoordt, was trained in his birth city but afterwards went to the school of Trufer and served as the Rector there. He was a famous teacher and taught many students. When he was on his position he expanded the palace school and used it to train many future loquetores and rectors with utmost diligence. Fromafulc and Engelberaht of Koelne moreover participated the great council in Parthenope, the city of Virgina, where they argued forcefully together with the representatives from Thalassara and Arkasia, and indeed made the council passing the creed which allowed the respective *basilicae* use their native tongue alongside Chancery Lucanian to preach the Words of Sol. This was indeed an ecumenial council with the following people participating: the Ialmarians, the Parmenians, the Toutanians, the Ippae, the Thalassarans, the Gisels, the Portavians, the Arkasians, the Arzavashians, and the Himarians. Through these ways King Hlodorecht indeed improved the state by employing those who were able and listened to their advice keenly. And here also I shall finish Book 1, as now we move from the time before Polydeukes into the era of the Church of Invincible Sol.

## Buch Zwei [WIP!]


#### 2.? The *Urlagilando*

But according to Degeno, this line of power gradually waned and these kings became do-nothing kings, and that many kings of equal nobility and courage rose up and dragged the whole Giselreich into a period of *Urlagilando*, or warring states. During this period many Gisels also went to many foreign lands and they performed many remarkable deeds, and at this time the name Gisels was known far and wide in the south. These kings, when they saw fit, perhaps because one of them was very strong, also resumed to use the title of Antiocar in an honorific manner. It is by then a certain Hagano, who was at first a *Grave* sent by the king of Mayenau who oversees the district called Neustland, where he served faithfully, paid the king many good horses and silver as tribute, and then attacked fiercely against the Vinnans and conquered their lands. Later, the king rewarded him the region around middle Talbe and named him a *Vürste* among the *Landaldras*, or princes. But after Hagano died, the kingdom of Mayenau went into turmoil and was conquered by the Söstfalens, who weren't able to conquer Giselwiech, which was refurbished by Hagano and defended by his son Walther fiercely. Walther, who was equally brave as his namesake, eventually controlled a very large kingdom and was named *Waldand* by the Talbelanders, the Mayens, the Litts and the Ripoarians.

Charamundas, who collected from many other reliable sources and wrote dutifully as a historian and commentator, not only continued the work of Degeno but also revised many places. Charamundas argued that:

> The Gisels, or Leodarians, I am apt to believe, derive their original from no other people; but from very early on they were mixed with the old Tolnars, also called Pyrigians, and often travelled by land and fleet to many other kingdoms; and especially into the might eastern ocean, settleing many northern isles, but they hadn't reached *Fernord*, also called Septemtrionia, where ice always covered the land and the wind so repugnant and forbidding, so people from our world never enter. Moreover, the Gisels were of settled nature very early, who, benefitting from the convenience of large rivers and flat fields, from then on cultivated grain and rye and sold them to the southern lands.

Charamundas' opinion is also the opinion I concur in, becaue otherwise one would be without any means to explain the existence of Lucanian words in the earliest bardings, for instance one might conflate *Reddar* with *Ekues*, or *Hauptmann* *Kaptaneus.* Charamundas was also apt to point out that it seemed early Gisels were closely related to the Tolnars as he found many Gisel names, for instance Guilelm, Cualtherio, Reginmundo and Adelfunso, were prominent among the Syonese, the Rutilians and the Ialmarians. Similarly, Charamundas also claimed that the Thalassarans frequently came to the Heldish Isles and Uttaland and traded with the Litts and the Ripoars, which is also a commendable point. He also discussed how the Gisels called Ellthonos:

> The Thalassaran writer Antipater recorded this: In their old ballads they celebrate _Tuisto_, a God sprung from the earth, therefore a form of *Ellthonos.* But this tradition didn't exist very long because very early the Gisels were able to read the words of sol through Heruisk, one of the oldest sacred tongues of Sol, similar to Weliglyph or the words of Simorgh, which came from the south in the equatorial land of Media. It is said that Phoster Wiesurd to the Gisels was like Phoster Haikus to the Arkasians, both spreading the words of Sol directly from the Phoster-Navigator Phaeton himself. Therefore well before Polydeukes the Just established the *basilica*, the Gisels were believers of the Invincible Sun.

Many years after Charamundas died, the Warring States waxed on with larger dominions now annexing the smaller, and these larger states often attacked each other. At some time the Haganonen declined and the Alleman Kingdom, which was ruled by the line of the vun Stoufburg kings and acquired the title of Antiocar. However, then the Intercalation took place, which was indeed a most horrible disaster. The Anteans, the Aelethans, the Tonorians, the Sambians and the Valzs invaded these kingdoms from five directions, and because many of these people believed not in Sol but in Ellthonos, a great war happened. At this time also the Lucanians and the Campanians began the first Aithofery, and the Himarians supported them with a large number of *ghazi* warriors and well-equipped *faris*, who then conquered and settled in Longonia, after retaking the land from the Uticans. Therefore the Gisels urged their kings to have a new Antiocar to bear the fire and lead the faithful against these nations, and coincidentally, the Lotharen king Phosbert united his kingdom with the queen of the Allemans, Solgisa, and consequently was proclaimed finally a true Antiocar. Phosbert accumulated wealth, force and a system of state, which helped him cope with this crisis and established a unified state of Gisely.

Many people outside of the country do not even know who the first king of the Gisels was. The *De Gentibus* of Cinatus gives some detail about these people, for he described that the *Leodinones* had a very large town called *Vicus Pigni*, which many though might be Giselwiech. while Parmenion's *Historiai* seemed to wrote them as war-leaders, very likely merely copying how Demetrios Batrachos boasted about how he annihilated 200,000 Allemans with a single charge of his companion horses, except that he changed the army of 'barbarians' into Gisels. However, I personally think the works of Trefoniis Puifis, son of Luvkis, is very demonstrative in this matter, and hence is worth quoting. In Book II, when he described how the Uticans sacked Parthenope, he says:

> When Mago and the Uticans marched northwards, he sent the generals Abirami and Hanno with an army collected against the Ciburians. The King of Trema and Spalatum, hearing about the march of the enemies, rushed forth to help their friends. Hanno, who would brook no delay, urged Abirami to immediately attack this coalition and restore all payments which the Utican King gave to them to win them over from the Parthenopese. And they should also surrender any Parthenopse hiding in their cities, because these people were according to him warmongers responsible for a violation of peace and committed idolatry against the Great God Ellthonos. The Rutilians refused and challenged them in a duel. Abirami therefore sent a bodyguard sworn two him called Galba to challenge the Rutilians, who, after discussing the matter thoroughly, picked some men from the mercenaries before finally chosing a certain swordmaster (*magister enses*) called Mellobaudes, son of Voltimnos, whose mother was a Gisel slave. Mellobaudes then challenged Galba most eagerly and ran him through with his sword after they exchanged several blows and frequently hit each others' helmet and shields.

From here, it is clear that Trefoniis described the Gisels as a group of mercenaries, who frequently served in the Cirburnian army. These were also attested by Degeno, who says that royal leaders of the Gisels were often called by the Rutilians Franks, because they thought they were brave, responsible in service, and used throwing-spears very well. He also recorded a general called Radagast, who, according to the tradition in Sordland, served first the Ciburnians and then Campanians, and thereafter he went to the Ialmarian Isles and served there. His son, called Regino, or by the Campanian name Antonius Radagasianus, was a legate of the general Epetos Oustiou of Nizza, who was later defeated by Polydeukes the Just.

Some times later, the geographer Philosthenes claimed differently, that 'the people of Thiudonia, also called Leodary, never to have mingled by inter-marriages with other nations, but to have remained a people pure.' This opinion, though wide-spread, is utterly false, as we have clearly discussed in the text before. He also claimed the Gisel lands east of Markia was full of 'gloomy forests and marshes,' which is again, seemingly not based on any sources. One indeed might question how this famous geographer composed his text. The only point one found Philosthenes commendable is that he correctly identified that the name 'Phrankoi' came from 'the word *Phramm*, or *Phranko*, which means a javelin.'

Thalassaraios of Thalassara, who seemed to have read the work of Charamundas and was familiar to both the Helds and the Gisels. When he writes about how during the war between the grandsons of Antiochos Batrachos and the Portavians, the latter captured and laid waste to Chaeaia, he also writes the following:

> Meanwhile, at this time Respendial, the King of the Red Portavians, withdrew his forces because he heard some Franks led by Godogiselos came across the Samandros and pressed his dominions hard. When Respendial then attacked the Franks, in his army there were some *Thiudonoi*, who defected him because of the proximity of their language and customs to the Franks. And then the two armies met on the field of Kalautanos, where Respendial lost twenty-thousand men. At this time, the Franks, also called the Gisels by their historian Charamondos, looted the baggage train of Respendial and then moved into his duchy, afterwards they sacked several Portavian towns, including the rich emporium Gyulavar and Mortis Wasara. Bultusu the collected a large army to help his kin and destroyed the Frankish army, killing their leader.

This event was also recorded by the later writer of the *Book of the History of Vinnans*, Tassilo of Vigenberg, who explained it in a more orderly manner:

> At this time, [Hrudopert] the *Marckgrave* of Vinnen, seeking to increase his favour with the Antiocar and expand his land, decided to attack the land of the Portavians. At first his *Vizegrave*, Thoidemer, advised him not to do so because he thought the descendants of Mantokos were strong, but Hrudopert was more persuaded by a certain merchant called Memnos, who claimed that the Portavians were planning to settle in Thalassara and their fertile lands will be left vacant, so Hrudopert hastily drew an army and commenced an attack with Thoidemer, Godegisel and his brother Hrudorihh. At first they indeed met no resistance, and the leaders became very arrogant and falsely believed the enemies had already ran away. Then near the town of Zsiolasburg, they encountered a very large army led by Bulko the leader, who ran the army through with a multitude of horsemen and killed all three princes.

Therefore, the historians not from Gisely often give us information about the Gisels, but they always failed to recognise where the Gisels from or which king these Gisels belong to. And then many of their written hearsays are not to be believed.

[...]

## Book Whatsoever Idk
### Jahr 244 nach die Interkalation

Right after Winter Solstice of the last year [243 P.I], the Army of General Herr Fulrad [vun Kukenhoben] secretly planned a surprise attack against the Portavian garrison of Salzach, as the enemy believed they dispersed into wintering and would not resume the siege. Some of the Lisnen soldiers pretended to be Uckerani who wished to surrender to the Portavians and entered the castle by night, while some others scaled the wall secretly with ladders and overwhelmed the sentinels with ease because of their number. Then a battle in the courtyard followed. The enemy commander, called Csongor the Tall, as well as another leader called Elemer the Centurion, were slain in the battle. Among the Gisels, fifty men including Captain Herr Krothart vun Kellen, from Kullenstede in Rugilland, were also killed. Upon hearing this, Roga [King of Portavia] was greatly dismayed, because he himself and his bodyguard were still staying in Ennsbruck, without a force at their hands. Therefore, after ordering his son Bela to remain in Ennsbruck and command his forces remaining in the camp, he secretly escaped from the town with his advisors and then rode back to Fehérvár. But with Roga leaving, the leader of the Campanian contingent, Messer Emillio Stratioci also decided to leave because he was angry about his ally [Roga] didn't inform him this and considered his troops were placed in a very dangerous position, therefore he, after informing Bela about his decision, also withdrew from Dusser.

Despite entering the new year with a victory, the Gisels were more worried than happy because the health of Antiocar Lothar III was deteriorating day by day. For he, without an heir, appointed the general and Colonel-senior Herr Rekkared us Quadenburg as his heir, a nomination confirmed by his cabinet. The old Antiocar, suffering from one time stroke and this time a serious cough, long before this day told his friends and servants that death, as if by some kinds of messengers, had announced signs to him. Finally, when his painful ills combating each other and sapping his strength, the weakness of his condition took its toll. He felt very ill when he was reading *Geography* of Bertramn of Ockarbeck in the palace of Fulgerheim, and then was taken by the servants to his bed, and in the final days before death came across the doorstep, he distributed his possessions in writing just as he wished. He finished his last day and left an almost unbearable sorrow to the State of the Gisels. He lived for 54 years and was the last of the vun Lotharen line. His death caused immense trouble for the Gisels not because of a lack of competence, but because many men of similar courage, nobility, and prestige acted out of their own interest rather than prudence and loyalty to the state, forcing Rekkared to deal with them one by one.

For there is always one thing worse than one might expect, because as last winter a great *basilica* council took place in Mayen, disputing about whether the *thelema* of Sol was clement or not. The council was presided by the Colonian legate Guillermo da Savuna. Archiloquetores and loquetores from both Gisely [or Giselreich] and foreign lands like Thalassara, Vitunia, Sambia, Motta, Rutilia, Palesia, Longonia, Heldland, Arkasia, Aelethland, Pravenia, Ialmaria, Sillingia, Antea, Himaria, and even delegates from many other distant lands. The delegates of Tonoria and Portavia protested to the Pontiff of Colonia about picking Gisely as the location and decided not to be present in this council, despite its ecumenical nature. At first the council discussed the matter of setting up schools in Misuia, but many rejected this proposal because they didn't wanted reciprocity, and that they were deeply worried about the heretical Salvationism rampant in meny rebellions of the said country. The council then became a quagmire of endless disputation and defamation, with parties assailing each other by inventing non-existent opinions and points of view. From what I have read from the compiled tracts and notes, the major argument was around Loquetor Castorio of Palesia, who proposed that the Three as well as Moon acted specifically with a clement will to help connect the World-of-days to the House of Sol, but his enemies, namely Archiloquetor Heliophilos of Pella and Thomas of Luntport, accused him of falling into the heresy of *Eleophysitism*, while Castorio and his men attacked them of being not explaining Sol according to *Liber Solis*, and causing the debate to shift to a contest about the nature of the Book and the Intercalation. Meanwhile, Doctor of Theology Omar daw'Aleanbar and some fellow Longonian loquetores, as well as Theubert van Basten, Bohuta of Monscutna, John of Eastburgh, and some other clergymen, also contended the matter of equal capacity of *Phos* among every individual as a grace of Sol, which was neither rejected nor refused because many delegates weren't prepared or ready to talk about this matter. 

Other matters were also discussed in the council, for which solved a long-standing dispute between the Archiloquetores of Minne and Trufer. The incumbent of Minne, Ambrosios, fabricated documents and tracts inserted in the Loquetorial history, that then he compiled a well-documented codex and presented to the Antiocar to certify his claims to the loquatry of Magenland, including certain privileges and *Urkunden* granted by previous Haganonen, Stoufen and Lotharen rulers. He also acted haughtily as if this evidence was true and good. However, these false compositions were pretty much artless, because they didn't follow the form of such texts, nor were they using proper calligraphy. Moreover, some of their claims even extended to Mayenau and Nordmark, which were obvious statements of their insatiable greed and power-lust. But some of the Truferan Archiloquetores also forged documents to prove their claims, and the two parties accused each other of infidelity, which made Lothar III very annoyed and he therefore pushed the matter to the vindication of Colonia. And eventually the legate judged that the district falls into the jurisdiction of the Archiloquetor of Trufer instead of Minne, which made Ambrosios of Minne hugely enraged. The legate also appointed, with the consent of canons and loquetores from Sillesen, that the new Archiloquetor of Apennlau would be Solfried, who was the original deacon of the seat. I will not include many other issues discussed in this council in its entirety, for one should consult the compiled records themselves.

Meanwhile Rekkared, who was at the time serving as the Marshal of the West, was residing in Allemannfurt and participating a judicial assembly of *Krieszog* Herr Warmund vun Hober of Allemannen. First, a messenger relaying from post stations informed Rekkared and Warmund about the death of Lothar, which made them very sad. After a few days, the high-chancellor Heinrich of Strappel, the imperator Herr Sebast vun Aliuswald and the chamberlain Willigis of Magenen, as well as many other men holding cabinet or palatine offices, came to him with the regalia, guarded by the *Vedertrager* wings, informing Rekkared of this most saddening affair, so that he would promptly know about Lothar's death and not in any way delay his own arrival, and that they were afraid of being accused of planning something sinister against the new Antiocar. They also brought with them the will of Lothar and declared him the Antiocar according to it. Then the Antiocar and these men moved east onto the *Heinrichsstraze* to return to Giselwiech. As Rekkared, having entered the region of Pfalztalbeland, was approaching the city of Lorisheim, Hatto the syndic, and Eigilbert, the Loquetor of the city and a man most learned in every subject, perceived the reason for his coming and anxiously sent a messenger as quickly as possible to Rekkared to learn just what he would command him to do, whether to wait for his arrival in the city or to meet him at some point along the way, as he was coming to the city. Rekkared understood the reason and told Eigilbert to come, because he was afraid of spending too much time on the road. 

There Rekkared also received another messenger, who had come to him from Awavoordt, about the death of *Kreiszog* Herr Koenrad van Floristad, and the Utts were yearning for leadership. He shared his condolences with the Awan, telling him that the person will soon be appointed by the court, when the matter is thoroughly discussed in the cabinet, and then met Hatto and Eigilbert in person, and after two days he moved on entering the valley of the Horle and then another day's march along the roads took him to Giselwiech, concluding a six-day journey. When he came to the gates of Giselwiech, many thousands of officials, nobles and Gisels received him with great favour and declared him Antiocar for the second time. He gave sincere thanks for the burial of Lothar, who was buried in the *basilica* of Sun-in-rags with other Antiocars of the Gisels, and he brought solace with fitting consolation to the servants and officials of the palace, who were struck with bitter sadness. For after the reading of Lothar’s will, nothing remained of Lothar’s goods that had not been shared out by his plan of division, since nothing had been left unbequeathed by him. And then an extra grain ration was distributed to the burgesses of Giselwiech. He also made the following arrangements of offices: the cabinet incumbents remaining were High-chancellor Heinrich of Strappel, the High-chamberlain Willigis of Magenen, the Senior of Admiralties Herr Karl vun Dennewitz, the *Gewritszog* Berthold of Oche, and Archiloquetor Hartmann of Helgenau remained the *Aprokrisier*; Herr Ekkebold vun Danau was appointed the Colonel-Senior, Herr Haitnand us Markomeren was appointed Justicier-in-chief, while Friedlieht of Wehmen was appointed the Chief Fisc-manager. These appointments were passed by the colloquia after discussion.  

Later the Antiocar received the embassies dispatched to the state. He listened to them diligently, dined them elegantly, and sent them back laden with sumptuous gifts. The most important among them came from the Consul August at Thalassara. The *protospatharios* Antigonos Arekolios, the deacon Basil Lekapenos and the envoy Michael came to him to reply to everything written to the brotherly-ruler in Thalassara. The Antiocar also sent Loquetor Amalrich of Serterp and abbot Ignaz of Eliwerf to Thalassara with the returning envoys, seeking to renew the former friendship and peace.

Despite the matter of succession is discussed by the top officials of the state, there were still significant uncertainties to many who hoped the old Antiocar might change his mind eventually. Some of them supported his illegitimate son Lothmann, but Lothmann refused them sternly because he, as a man content with his life, was happy that he remained as the judge of Giselwiech, plus he finally inherited the Lotharing villas around Talbeland. Arnolf the Bastard, who was Lothar's illegitimate brother, seeing his nephew had no intention of taking the throne, decided to make his own moves, because he himself thought the Antiocar's position be passed to the next closest in blood. While he previously discussed the matters with many men, including the old Antiocar Lothar himself, the Hich-chancellor Heinrich, the *Kreiszog* of Mayenau Lauwebold vun Oosthaim, as well as many other administrators and officials, but these people all urged him to accept the Antiocar's decision, which is Rekkared, who was as experienced a general as Arnolf, perhaps even with more reputation, because he contended frequently on the most dangerous western and southern frontline, and previously served in the cabinet. But Arnolf was no less prestigious. Having served various positions, including the sheriff of Griepshoben, the *Kreisoberist* of Angern, the Commander of the Life Guard, and eventually the *Kreiszog* of Angern, Arnolf's ambition was fuelled by his competence at various positions, all he lacked was a cabinet appointment, which his brother never made, because he himself perhaps was afraid of the accusations of nepotism. Once there were petitions to made him the Senior of Admiralties, but Arnolf, after weighting his inexperience with naval affairs and his reputations, refused the naming after it was passed by the colloquia. Arnolf, a man who was not only a competent planner, but extremely clever in carrying out his schemes, possessed of vast wealth (no mean asset in one who aimed at a throne), with the prestige of royal blood and of success in some former wars, with many of the regimental commanders at his side to help on his enterprise. But at this time, he pretended to be loyal and also went to the Antiocar himself, while secretly planning a coup d'état behind. 

Antiocar Rekkared then turned his head to other affairs. First, he appointed a member of the central army-advisory Maarten ver der Stappen as the commander of the Giselwiecher garrison, because the old commander Herr Bernward [vun Mostert] was of 61 years old and desired to retire. Colonel Maarten previously served in Ermelo effectively against the Mottan pirates and then in the advisory to the cabinet, which made him a trusted adjunct of Rekkared. He also appointed Ruudulf vun Huissen to the Utts as the new *Kreiszog*. At the same time, he personally met king Gustav of the Corusian Isles, who wished to continue his friendship as a client of the Giselian State, and presented a well-crafted Orichalcum sword to the Antiocar. In return, the Antiocar also granted him trading privileges in the ports of Hammo, Huotorp and Wehmen. In late-Hornung, Antiocar Rekkared now decided to field an army personally towards Sundarlaund to retake the city of Ennsbruck. But just as the army was gathering, the *Stadtgrave* of Giselwiech, Warnar [vun Burscheid], with his brother Ingobert and nephew Lantbert, gathered a small horde of men and attempted to fight their way in the Castle of Königsberg, his motives unknown, because people knew neither his previous misconducts nor his grudges against the Antiocar or his predecessor, so perhaps he was driven by his ambition of taking the position of the antiocar himself. But he was supported by none other than his cronies, which made this affair very strange. These men were then deemed criminally liable and imprisoned by Maarten and other men, because they dared to show weapon illegally in the capital and attack the garrison. After some time the Antiocar ordered Warnar, who conceived this plot, to be ran through with a sword, while the others deprived of their eyes as punishment. After the matter had been settled, the army departed Giselwiech.

However, seemingly enticed by the action of Warnar, Arnolf became very eager and decided to launch a coup d'état, which soon found considerable support. Clearly he had plotted for some time before the death of Lothar III and distributed his wealth under the guise of providing to the poor. Therefore, on the 18th of Langez, Arnolf instructed his son-in-law, *Kreisoberist* of Angern, Robert vun Puinnen to convene a council of military affairs in Lümborg. There, Robert openly declared that he was loyal to the cause of Arnolf, who should be rightfully ruler after Rekkared had dutifully acted as a regent', whereby the colonel Herfried of Hammo immediately objected and protested loudly to his superior, yet Robert ordered him to be detained and a day later had him secretly killed and thrown into the Reitha. Ambrosios, still recovering from his fury at Mayen, and always desiring to expand the jurisdiction of his see and siphon more cash, while constantly being jealous to his fellow loquetores, received some promises from Arnolf and also agreed to support his cause. Other main supporters of Arnolf came mainly from Magenland, Nordmark and Rugiland, because he himself had many clients in these regions. Some of them, for instance Gundsalvo us Flaund, who was the *Kreiszog* of Rugiland, supported him because Arnolf promised him a position in the cabinet, and that the Flaunds held immense local grudge to the family of Rekkared. Some, for instance the Liudger vun Hauden, *Markgrave* of the North, was cut-off from the capital and forced to comply nonetheless, especially because administratively many storages and barns where the Nordmarker garrisons acquired provisions were located not locally but in the more developed Ostfalen. Warmund vun Hober remained on the fence, out of the proximity of Allemannen to Rugiland, but the *Kreisoberist* Gotthard of Inden openly defected with two regiments of men, which forced Warmund to flee southwards from Allemannfurt into Sillesen. But the other three regiments remained under either in Wirtzburg or under the command of Herr Fridurich vun Pilten, the Marshal of the West. But when Arnolf wrote to the other lands, like Sordland, Mayenau, Horschen, and many other prefectures, he received no response.

Therefore, whether out of fear, or out of grudges, or out of fickle loyalty, or out of ambition, many men assembled under the banner of Arnolf, who was then proclaimed by his men Antiocar. Moreover, Arnolf also used his vast wealth to hire some mercenary from the northern isles, led by a certain Ingvar, who is said to have led 5,000 men and previously served in the Himarian army as a mercenary guard, whom they called a 'Sikalaber'. Later many men from Magenland, northern Littland and Ripoarland, including retired veterans, gathered to Lümborg to hear the Anti-antiocar out, either out of their fear of his cruelty, or out of their admiration of his fame, or out of their desire of his rewards, or simply having no faith in the state at all. Thus Arnolf ordered another regiment of men to be assembled. He then declared in a speech to them, as he himself ordered these to be distributed in written forms across the cities he ruled, promising he would strive to renovate the Giselian state. Then, with this force, Arnolf purged many loyal servants of the State and distributed these offices to his followers, or simply to rich individuals who bought the position from him. He even promised many of his followers the positions of inspectors and sheriff in districts he did not control because he was so confident about winning. 

Then the Flaunds sent officers Egica and Chintafred with a troop of 2,000 horses, whom he levied from various localities and equipped them with good or bad steeds, across the river Elsa into the region of Elsland and then Ripoarland, plundering peaceful towns and scorching villages in the manner of brigands. Afterwards, the troop returned whence they came with many booty. The grain and gold they captured filled many carts, which slowed the march greatly and used up many pack horses. Seeing their column marching slowly on the road, the sheriff of Vorriporaland Adelhard vun Tarrn and the captain Radwin vun Lupfurd, thinking about emergency measures, assembled some local garrisons and the *Landwehre* to pursue these looters, and they attacked and destroyed the baggage train of this column, and the loyalists prevailed. They took 200 heads, including the head of Chintafred, who was found to have been hiding in a cart of hay. Yet the main forces of the rebels remained in Angern because Arnolf deemed the season is not suitable for campaigning and instead wanted to wait for Spring.

Unbeknownst of this, Rekkared still proceeded with his men first west and then south, but when he reached Lipsk, he was informed of this by messengers and faced a dilemma, because just at the same time, local unrest broke out in Lisnen. When he moved to Oksburg and met there some representatives from Lisnia, including the Sheriff of Lipsk called Herr Ota z Balzec, the Sheriff of Daleminz Herr Zbinec z Lewinsky, and the Sheriff of Busina called Arnost of Milik, these men complained to him about how the local notables of the Uckerani, out of the number of their people and out of contempt to other Lisnen citizens, wanted to expand their borders and annex Ramenetz and many other shires. They even desired to be transformed into a new prefecture, or perhaps better a feudatory, to the state. However, there also arrived some Uckerani led by the previous Sheriff of Poschetz Waldomer, who accused the Businans and Dalemincians transgressing the boundaries and the Uckerani were forced to rebel to protect their own liberty and peace. Then a very fierce argument happened and the Antiocar ordered the two sides to temporarily stop because they had done so for the whole morning. 

However, when Rekkared and his follower left for the meal, some followers of Waldomer, seeing this as a chance of punishing their opponents, as if they can freely feud even when the Antiocar himself is present, flooded into the council building and had the other officials and delegates violently beaten up. Ota of Lipsk, who defended himself by stating the peaceful intention of he and his companions, was thrown by these men out of the window and broke his neck. The burgesses became very angry, seeing these people who should have been their guests now neglecting the laws of the state and sowing discordance in the city, and because a defenestration happened so recklessly without any regard of local honour or public order. The mayor Friduric the Merchant and his guards surrounded the building and demanded a negotiation, but then a certain Uckerani from the building shot a bolt of crossbow which hit the helmet of a guard. Friduric was outraged because these men even dared to bring weapon into the council building in such a manner, and then with his men attacked the Uckerani with clubs and swords. The Uckerani were not adequately equipped compared to the guards, but they did used various obstacles to block the stairway and shoot arrows down the windows. But the burghers attacked furiously and eventually broke in and killed all of these men, and only the adjunct of Waldomer, a certain Stoinev was left alive because he was to be interrogated.

When the Antiocar returned, he angrily asked what happened just as the grievously wounded Arnost was carried out of the building by some of the burghers and the monks of the hospital of Phoster Januarius. The mayor and sheriff Zbienc, who escaped thanks to his position closer to the door, then came before the Antiocar and related the matter in full. The Antiocar, having heard this, commanded the aforementioned Stoinev to be brought before him, who at first claimed that Waldomer was merely defending his honour, but the Businans and Dalemincians humiliated him with vile words so he decided to feud against them; however, as Zbinec cleared this accusation, then Stoinev confessed that Waldomer was already convinced by other Ukranians that his plead will not be heard, and that he only wanted to resort to violence and to use his own death to provoke the Uckerani. When this Stoinev was asked about whether Waldomer was associated with any sort of armed rebellion, Stoinev replied that he knew nothing about these militant actions even after interrogation, so that his words were believed true and good. Stoinev however did claim that the Userians and the Uckerani who followed judge Priebtschek of Koldow had secretly planned for a rebellion for a long time. Nevertheless, this Stoinev was then transferred to the urban court and being vindicated to be hanged due to murder. 

Thus the matter in Oksburg was settled, but not the empire. After this affair, the Antiocar realised his position was greatly unstable, and that he could only rely on trusted personnel, because he now faced a war of various fronts. First, he ordered his brother Ermengild to lead an army back to Talbeland to defend this region from the incursion of possible enemy attacks, because he couldn't ignore the imminent rebellion in Lisnen, nor was he sure about the Portavian army's position. He therefore decided to be personally present in Allemannfurt with a part of the state army to stabilise this region, because this will greatly stabilise the regions in the west, and that he ordered the troops of the western regions to be mobilised from their barracks respectively, because he was uncertain about defeating the enemy when a large part of the *Ostreich* followed Arnolf. When he proceeded to Allemannen, many people from various parts of the *Westreich* flocked to him, so that he convened a large popular assembly in the city of Elm, on 14th of Bluome. He first rewarded the officers and officials who remained loyal to the state, not to the rebel Arnolf. He also repremanded Warmund, who gave up his post and did not oversee his subordinate and allowed a defection in his prefecture. Therefore Warmund was deprived of his title as *Kreiszog*, replaced by the former *Pfalzgrave* of Allemannfurt, Welf vun Waltheren. Herr Liuvimer us Roggenhof, the *Kreisoberist* of Rugiland who brought with some loyalists, including some infantry and two wings of cavalry, was also accepted into the army. There, he also ordered a tract to be written and announced, which I include as following:

> In the name of Sol and Its indivisible *auctoritates*, the *Erstelioht*, the *Wächtar* and the *Lumpensunne*.
> 
> Let it be known to all Our faithful men—to the prefects, loquetores, abbots, generals, sheriffs, and all the people of Sol entrusted to Our care—how Arnolf, once a general of this state, stirred up by a diabolical spirit and swollen with pride, has forgotten his divine ministry and has broken the sacred oath of fidelity which he swore to the state before Sol, the Three and Its holy Phosters. He has presumed, with damnable audacity, to raise the standard of rebellion against the will of the former Antiocar Lothar, which is conveyed to Us by the faithful members of the cabinet and recognised by the procession of the Gisel people. Contemning the divine order, he also allowed the Northmen, those wolves, to prey upon the flock of Sol, and has made pacts with foreign powers, thereby disturbing the peace and concord which, by Sol's grace, it is Our ministry to uphold. He has become a sower of discord, a lover of sedition, and a manifest enemy of the justice of Sol.
> 
> Therefore, by the counsel and with the consent of Our men here assembled, and by the authority which the divine guidance has conferred upon Us, We declare this Arnolf, and all who willfully adhere to his perfidy, to be enemies of Sol, of Holy *basilica*, and of the entire people of this state. They are perjurers and traitors. All offices and stipends which they hold will be revoked by the state, and their persons are subject to the judgment which the law prescribes for such faithlessness. We take up arms, therefore, not to satisfy Our own anger, but to restore the justice of Sol, to defend Its holy *basilica*es, and to cut out this wicked sedition from the body of the faithful, lest the whole be corrupted by its contagion. Let every faithful man of Sol prepare himself, knowing that in this cause, we wield the sword not for worldly gain, but as ministers of the Unyielding Sol, to punish the wicked and preserve the righteous. May Sol Itself grant us victory.

Meanwhile, when spring arrived in Bluome and Winne, the army of Ermengild engaged the vanguards of the enemy in many skirmishes. At first, some of the Antiocar's advisers, like Heinrich the High-chancellor, believed their cause to be hopeless. On second thoughts, however, they changed their minds and the whole affair took on a different aspect. This is due to the fact that Ermengild fought very bravely and that might be a worthy opponent for the rebel, and to them this Ermengild represented a safe anchorage, a shelter from the storm of rebellion, and a man who previously served first in the navy and then in Vinnamark against the Tonorians, being vastly experienced. This man Ermengild, according to the historians, reminded people of his grandfather, the general Hugo, for he was always wrapped in gloom, and watchful, comprehending and analysing constantly. Far from being ignorant of warlike manoeuvres, there was no aspect of skirmish warfare, no trick of ambush nor tactic of pitched battle, in which he was not thoroughly versed. In the matter of physical prowess, moreover, Ermengild was more energetic and virile than the old man Arnolf. Many claimed that anyone who received a blow at his hand was a dead man straightaway and whole armies trembled even when he shouted from afar. I however considered these words panegyrics with certain amount of truths. However, he did achieved many victories in these skirmishes, either out of his bravery or out of the courage and integrity of his cavalry.

And now I shall turn to relate the first battle happened in this civil war. Then general Ermengild met the army of the pretender Arnolf in the field, near a town called Taunsien, who is very confident of his forces and ordered his men to attack head on in full force, with both cavalry and footmen, because he believed that he had but to stretch forth his hand to seize the Antiocarate. The two armies, which were alike in training, equipment and command, fought with great hesitation because they all knew very well their opponents' valour and discipline. They made many small skirmishes and probing attacks, but none of them engaged wholeheartedly. But the fight between the wings of cavalry was more chaotic, as usual for mounted combat. And then the two men, by common consent, decided to engage in a duel. So, riding out to the space that divided the two lines of battle, they spied one another and without more ado came to close quarters. But Ermengild, without greeting with his sword, stepping up suddenly, delivered a very powerful thrust with his longsword. Arnolf, despite dumbfounded at the unexpectedness of this stroke, which hit his breastplate very hard, then fended off his next slash with a strike called master strike, simultaneously landed a blow from the right with such power on Ermengild's helmet that he momentarily lost control of his veins, while fending off his attack with the cross guard, thereupon Ermengild lost interest of fighting and rode back to his men. Then, seeing his left wing was on the brink of breaking, Arnolf ordered the men to retreat, so that despite failing in a duel, Ermengild still controlled the field and proclaimed himself a victor.

But soon, as Ermengild pursued the enemy further north, his victories became ephemeral and his strength weakened, it seemed the defeat had taken its toll on his spirit, like a young wolf defeated by an older one. And his apprehension soon developed into anxiety and rashness, which conquered his mind, making all instructions from Rekkared forgotten, and he decided not to delay but to gamble a decisive battle. He also ordered the capital garrison to march out against the enemy, an order he persuaded the imperator to make. Then, on the 22th of Brach, the two armies met at a place called Breitveld, where the loyalists were utterly beaten because Ermengild and his horsemen pursued all the way into the enemy baggage train without realising that commanding a wing of cavalry is vastly different from commanding an army. Had not Maarten ver der Stappen led a valiant rear guard action against the advancing Alemanns, the army would be destroyed. In this battle, both sides lost more than two thousand men, but Ermengild became increasingly agitated not only because of the enemy, but also because Maarten, whom he called to his side as the garrisons of the capital were also marching with them, seemed cooler than ever when he took the field. Moreover, because the message of his defeat eventually reached Rekkared, the Antiocar considered his options and ordered his command to be relieved, and he was to be assigned to Salzach as a garrison commander. 

Ermengild felt greatly neglected because his ambitions appeared to be slipping from his grasp, and his lost of command of the troops made him felt greatly humiliated. Therefore he openly complained to many that this treatment was undeserved, when he was riding with some of his men towards Salzach. Disgruntled, he and his followers, including the captain Donarmund vun Udonen and the Loquetor of Ruhrgau Heinrich, transferred secretly across the borders to Tonoria. They rode very quickly because they are only a hardened band of men. There he made himself known to the king Segtiu II, because the king Segetiu always planned to weaken the State out of his obligations to the Portavian king Ruga. Now Ermengild, away from the State of the Gisels, rode with his men to the grand harvar to meet king Ruga, who planned to make him a foil to the Rekkared. He then not only married his niece to Ermengild's son Hugo, but also handed him the command of the troops of Istvan and Cuintul, as well as a hardened band of Poartavian mercenaries, led by his trusted lieutenant Dominik of Szomos. Thus Ermengild departed again from Portavia, not as an anti-antiocar but as a vassal, a foreign instrument, who pitifully bowed to a foreign ruler to maximise his own strength in the contention of the antiocarial office.

At the same time, the Antiocar finally brought with him the soldiers from Sillesen, Allemannen and Obertalbeland east again into Pfalztalbeland. But before all of the campaigning, he convened a very large assembly in Giselwiech, because Ermengild's actions weren't unknown to him after a month, when time has alread ran its course into Hewi. He and the cabinet officials condemned both pretenders again in front of the colloquia and also drafted many administrative orders. First, the representatives of the colloquia passed an emergency war tax to fund the war efforts, as Gisely was now embroiled by a large civil war. The tax is passed without obstruction, except by a certain Markian representative called Oriliu Tuscul, who always voted no if the incumbent Antiocar refused his petition to raise his individual stipends and pension, especially because everytime he claimed that delegation was both consuming his body, his mind and his purse. Some days later the other two Markian representatives, namely Salvian Marcellul and Antoninu vun Ragnesti, clearly embarrased by their colleague, advised the Antiocar to promote Oriliu as the new *basilica* advocate of Regnesti, because the old advocate Cornel was already eyeing his retirement, and the Antiocar complied with their petitions. Later it is said that he enjoyed his life of *otium* running the *basilica* vineyards there, but he sold poor-tasting wine - 'In vino veritas!' This matter was related to me by Salvian's son Iulian. Second, the imperator ordered the reserves, the *Landwehre* and the veterans in Uttaland, Littland, Obertalbeland and Mayenau be mobilised and put into service in new regimental units. A total number of 12,000 men was planned to be raised, armed and trained accordingly. Thirdly, the Antiocar also sent to Heldland a delegation led by the *Gewritszog* Berthold of Oche, because he wished the Heldish King to remember their traditional friendship and honour the defensive pact and sent reinforcements to help the Giselians fight against the enemies.

Meanwhile, Ermengild and his men moved into Markia and then Schwynen, before they moved into northern Allemannen which was still swayed somewhat by the enemy because of its closeness to Rugiland. When he arrived in Haferfeld, he convened a small council with his close followers. Heinrich the Loquetor advised him to temporarily give up designs on the throne himself, since he was in no position to take on both the Rekkared and Arnolf. Ermengild then indulged himself in an outburst of insolence at the expense of the former, and announced to his troops that he was to present himself to the latter in the guise of vassal. And hence, on the first of Hewi, he appeared to many as the newly appointed *Kreiszog* of Sundreich, who temporarily also commands the military affairs of Schwyn, Lisnen, Markia and Greutmark, with the charter of Arnolf in his hand. Then Ermengild sent many letters to the regional military commanders hoping to find help. Out of these men, only the Uckerani from Lisnen, led by their leader Jasomir and Peschek, appealed to him because they long wanted to dominate the whole region at the expense of other Lisnens; others, led by the Marshal of the West Herr Fridurich vun Pilten, as well as the forces of Fulrad in Salzach, remained in their position because they feared that the Portavians might launch another campaign against Greutmark, Lisnen and Sundreich.

After Rekkared assembled his forces, and time ran its course into Aran, when wheat was already ripened for harvesting, he moved to besiege Hilmessen, because this junction controls the *Nordenstrasze* into Angern. The siege, starting from the end of Brach, that is to say the 29th, lasted for some days before the syndic Hildward ordered the city to surrender, because they were in no position of defying the Antiocar. Arnolf moved his troop with great confidence, because he defeated Ermengild and considered his opponents to be minuscule, as he intended to besiege the fortress of Dietmund in lower Talbeland, and hence force his way to Giselwiech, but found the fortifications well-prepared and the commander Herr Willhelm vun Valkenwald most determined to stop him. He assaulted the fortress for two days without any success, and his adjunct Gotthard of Inden was killed when he was scaling the wall. Arnolf woudln't wait his siege machines to be constructed or built, because he realised that the loyalist movement into Angern was very dangerous to him. Therefore Arnolf decamped and moved again eastwards to attack the Antiocar's troop around Hilmessen. Arnolf also ordered the army of Ermengild to march south.

On the 7th of Witu, just as the two armies were moving along the fields and roads of Gisely, a violent earthquake struck most of northern Chaeania, Arkasia, and by extension Uttaland. The *basilica* of Phoster Diederik in Turnveen collapsed and the Loquetor Gisleif as well as many of the functionaries perished in this horrible disaster. May them return to Sol happily! On the same day the judge of Brempolders, the worthy Angilpert Goldschmied, died of old age. This man was a descendant of a family of burgesses not unknown in those days, for instance the syndic of Heliwerf Helgaud and the captain of the Awavoordter Regiment Richard were all from this stock, and Floris the *Kreiszog* deservedly held them in high esteem, because of their civic contributions, donations to the poor and the school, and many other charitable deeds. With Gisela van Heelo, this Angilpert begot the deacon-magistrate of Koelne, Weishard. Angilpert was buried in Heelo, whose *basilica* he funded in honour of Sol and Phoster Januarius, where I governed as a priest most faithfully for many years. Here he ended his life happily and was laid to return to Sol in peace.

It is reported also by this time a group of Rutilians led by Siginolfo da Corisa entered the service of the Palesian duke, Uvis the Bald, and defended the town of Pales against a horde of Portavian armies led by the Duke Szolomon of Durosh. The siege lasted for four months beginning in Bluome, and eventually Szolomon's forces were repelled by the defenders valiantly, because they assaulted the city without much success. Eventually the Nizzans sent a fleet and prompted Szolomon to lift the siege. In this battle the archiloquetor of Pales, Rumis, who had just returned from the council of Mayen, blessed a catapult which destroyed three of the Portavian catapults. The men were shocked and called this catapult The Fist of the *Wachtar.* Siginolfo and his brother Giustiniano and a thousand *venturieri* they commanded fought with great courage and demonstrated great excellence in the weaponry.

#### The Battle of Ioannesberg

Now I shall return to the course of history from this little vignette about a disaster and a worthy family, not least because the rival Antiocars weren't informed by this horrible event at all in their respective armies. I will now write about what I read from various journals, reports and other tracts about their confrontation, but not at its greatest length, for this battle, just like the battles preceding in this little book, was very well-documented by many writers. I will, therefore, treat this battle in a concise manner fitting of historical writing. 

So the Gisels, when they took Hilmessen, held a council of armies to decided whether they should move further north along the *Nordenstraze* into Angern. The Marshal of the North, Herr Sunnegar vun Holzburg advised the Antiocar to move towards Hebestede because the town is a junction of the *Nordenstraze* and the *Talbestraze*, and therefore a path the enemies must pass by. The other commanders agreed because now they possessed a strong army of 18 regiments and 16 wings, which was of approximately 36,000 infantry and 13,000 cavalry. Because they possessed this large force, and that the generals estimated the enemy forces were no greater than 15 regiments with a fitting number of horses, based on the message that Ermengild was sent south with a significant force, the army of Rekkared was confident of meeting the enemy on the field. This, however, was greatly wrong, as they neglected the sheer number of mercenaries Ermengild brought with him from Portavia and Tonoria, so that Arnolf only sent him a token force instead of a portion of his army. Therefore Arnolf possessed a field army at its greatest strength, also reinforced by certain *Landwehre* drawn from the local sheriffs and aldermen.

So the army moved their camp from the city of Hilmessen to Nürnfurd, which is of two days' march north from Hilmessen. From there some spies and outriders were sent to find out where the enemies camped, other *Prodomer* were sent forth in front of the army to screen it from enemy scouts. Sunneger believed a strike on their camp might be devastating, so he advised a portion of the horses to advanace as vanguard. Certain Angerner, dressing up like labourers and servants, were also discovered spying on the army and therefore detained. When these men were caught and brought before him, Rekkared didn't plann to punish them, as is the usual practice, that on the contrary he ordered Colonel Maarten to attend them and point out clearly the exact arrangement of the camp. After this had been done he asked them if the officer had explained everything to them with due diligence. When they answered that he had done so, he furnished them with provisions, and told them to report carefully to Arnolf what had happened to them. 

On the following morning at daybreak, the outriders returned and reported an enemy contingent, perhaps dispatched by Arnolf, was moving towards the town of Ramsloog. They estimated from the length of march that the contingent was not significant, probably of 6,000 in number. They also reported to him the terrain in front of the army, which then helped the commanders to decided the battlefield. With the Antiocar hearing this, he considered his options and thought that this portion might be an enemy contingent devised to threaten his wings, therefore he arranged the Colonel Heistulf of Trufer to lead 4,000 foot and 2,000 horses of the Littlanders to probe their position. However just as the forces of Heistulf departed, which was in the afternoon of 15th of Witu, some other outriders, as well as some local Angern men, reported to the Antiocar that the enemy camp was very close, but it lays north of their position, not west. Sunneger claimed accordingly that the enemy dispatch from the northwest might be a reinforcement, and argued for giving battle immediately. Rekkared, on one hand ordered the men to rest in the camp, on the other hand sent some groups of horses to probe the enemy camp at night to estimate their numbers. He also dispatched many messengers to Heistulf to order him return hastily along the roat to a village called Bohledorf, which is northeast of the field he picked, because he hoped that Heistulf's troops can appear on the back of the enemies, and the route is closer.

The midnight was tense as many soldiers and officers weren't able to sleep, some were afraid of participating in a battle of fraticide, some were worried of their cronies or friends, who served in the regiments in Angern, Nordmark, Harsaten or Rugiland. So the next morning the army departed from the camp, leaving the baggage train behind. Rekkared led the army open to the field in front of a manor called Ioannisberg. Then he deployed the defence as following: first, he ordered a contingent of 2,000 foot commanded by colonel Maarten to capture the north-eastern village called Uhgosberg and defend there. He also deployed a regiment forward towards a walled manor called Heiligehecke, led by Captain Arnwijk of Umpteda. After an adequate number of reserves was selected, the main body of infantry was then arrayed between this two points, forming two battle lines, and the horses commanded by Colonel Herr Willhelm vun Haxthausen protected the left flank. The right flank was deliberately left open, only supported by enough longbowmen and two banners of foot, because the position of Uhgosberg was quite forward and the terrain on the right wing was rather ragged. The first line of the centre was formed by the Talbelanders, commanded by Colonel Messer Marco Cittadini, while the second soldiers from the south, commandead by Colonel Herr Liuthard vun Hapsbaurg.

Having made these preparations, he rode along the lines and addressed his troops in a few words suitable to the occasion: 'The faithful of Sol-Victurus! Bear in mind your past battles and fight like brave men worthy of yourselves and your country. If we overcome the enemy, praise the Sun-in-rags, then this brotherly war will end, when the viper's head is cut off from the body. Now that Sol offers us a chance to restore peace and end the bloodshed, how utterly craven, in short how foolish shall we be, if we reject the greatest of goods and choose the greatest of evils from mere love of life. Go, therefore, to meet the foe with two objects before you, either victory or death. For men animated by such a spirit must always overcome their adversaries, since they go into battle ready to throw their lives away.' As the Antiocar himself was resting for a while in the shade of an ash-tree atop Ioannisberg because he was already quite worn out as much from riding as from bearing his arms, messengers of the vanguard came to him and informed us about the outriders of the enemies were seen. And hence the army of Arnolf formed up from their camp. From the number of banners it is estimated that the army of Arnolf reached 70,000, but included many hastily levied men or poorly trained *Landwehre*, which he placed in the first line to use, as if these people were expendable.   maintained a large portion of his horses in reserve because he realised that he cannot outflank the loyalists by charging his horses upward onto Ioannisberg. 

But before the battle began, the Antiocar decided to offer his enemy a chance to repent their faults. For this he sent the syndic Janso of Hammo and the auxiliary-chancellor Poppo to this task. But the men of Arnolf, rudely humiliating the two envoys and jesting the envoys of cowardice, sent them back not with good words but with a crude axe. Since the Sassens received the men with such an offhand and scornful manner, the Antiocar became enraged about this whole affair and sent another crier to the enemies, saying: 'You underhanded cowards and rogues, go tell your master, Arnolf, that Rekkared, Shepherd of his people and servant of the Unyielding Sol, does not pay tribute to oath-breakers and rebels. We have come not for strife, but for justice, to end this bloodshed you have begun. It is not our doom you see before you, but your own. Prepare yourselves, for today the ravens of your banner will find a feast not of our men, but of the prideful traitors, who aligned themselves not with public good but with foreign interveners and barbarians, and falsely used the holy name of Sun-in-rags, who will ensure a certain proper ending for themselves! If you are to repent from this, immediately leave the army of this man, who led your paths astray!' Some of Arnolf's men became very impetuous because of these words, shouting brute and vicious words and fired many arrows to the crier, who rode off quickly from these dangers; others, as if the word touched them by heard, slowed down as if they were reflecting the words.

At about ten o'clock there first came probing attacks, as the enemy arranged their formations after a march. The men were sent forth with pavises and heavy arbalests to exchange fire with the enemy. But after some time, when the longbowmen on our flanks supressed the enemy pavisiers, the enemy sent their *Prodomer* to attack and drove our skirmishers from the first line, killing some while capturing some. But some of them were thwarted by the pavisiers and killed. Arnolf, at eleven o'clock, commenced a furious attack upon the defenders of Uhgosberg. The battle raged on as Arnolf sent the Allemanns and the Magens to attack this farm, but their attack was repelled. Some of the rebels charged into the farm, but then the defenders closed the gate and slaughtered them. Then, the mercenaries led by Ingvar attacked impetuously in the centre. Because many of these Sikalabers had once served in the bodyguard of the Longonian Amir, the prevailed against some of our men by their courage and skill, but the Talbelanders held the line admirably, relying on their orderly formation of halberds and spears and the superiority of their arms. The rear ranks of the Gisels followed close on their comrades, cheering them on, but the enemies behaved like cowards, never coming near their mercenaries nor attempting to back them up. But then Arnolf repeatedly charged the centre with combined arms, sometimes on foot, but sometimes with horses and foot together, sometimes with horses alone, but these attacks were uniformly unsuccessful, because the Talbens maintained their formation tight, and the horses supported them timely. Every time when the enemy attacked with great force, the loyalists countered with their cavalry reserve in time and pursued the regrouping rebels repeatedly. The *Glevener* and *Prodomer* from Talbeland highly distinguished themselves, attacking bravely with lances and swords, beating off the enemy horses and capturing maniples of soldiers. At this time, Rekkared also learned from a messenger that Haistulf's force might arrive later in the afternoon, as he engaged with a significant number of enemies and routed them, and now he was marching back as fast as he could.

Ezzelin vun Ezzonen, the Commander of the *Vedertrager*, despite leading his men valiantly and captured two regimental standards and many soldiers, was killed when he charged into the enemy ranks. His command was resumed by the commander of the *Vorestrietäre* banner, Herr Enshelm vun Mersefeld. Captain Hatto of Saalebrügge of the *Glevener* wing of Dietmund was also slain. On the enemy side, the cup-bearer of Arnolf, Heribert vun Behren, the Chief-colonel Helmut vun Heuna, and the *Apokrisier* Loquetor Edelhard of Norendorf, were killed in the melee. Among the ranks of our men, a man called Eumenes from the Life Guards proved most able as he killed Gundsalvo the traitor with his halberd slamming through Gundsalvo's helmet. Eumenes' father was a Thalassaran but he moved to Giselwiech as a son of a merchant.

The battle raged on as the enemies could use more reserves to stabilise their attacking efforts. At this time Rekkared acted with great generalship and bravery. At one time he urged the frontline soldiers to carry on and maintain their cohesion. At the next moment he was at the rear of the army, shouting encouragement to those men who hung back; he reminded them of the cause for which they had taken up arms, *id est* for the justice and concordance of the State and for the righteous path of Sol is followed. Hence strenuously he performed the duty of a general. While on the other hand the Angerners were left in the reserve by Arnolf, perhaps worried or perhaps wanted to wear down Rekkared's men gradually. But the battle waxed again because eventually some of the Angerner regiments were sent to confront the tired Talbelanders. Both sides rotated their troops to rest. After the battle had in this manner continued incessantly for five hours, the generals began sending messengers as if they had many more of them to search for the men who should have come.

Just as Rekkared was making up his mind to commit his cavalry reserves on the left, he and his advisors, on Iohannisberg, saw great smokes and sounds of movement from northwest. At about five o'clock in the afternoon, Captain Heinric van Brugeldam's second regiment of Awavoordt advanced into Bohledorf and attacked the enemy rear with great force. Some minutes later, the forces of Haistulf arrived from the direction of Bohledorf but attacked directly southeast against the main enemy line. He immediately ordered Sunnagar to lead the cavalry to charge from the left to support Haistulf. The tired Rugilens were defeated utterly and they were the first to turn around and give up the field. At the same time, Rekkared ordered the centre to advance and to pursue with the greatest ferocity possible. The attack suceeded at every point and the pursuit lasted till long after dark, and then discontinued it only on account of the fatigue of the troops, who began engaged for ten hours. It is by this time the enemy general Wichmann vun Possel arrived with 4,000 foot, which was indeed the force the scouts discovered and Haistulf pursued, but they realised the main battle much later than their counterparts. Wichmann and the enemy leader Robert vun Puinnen defended valiantly, and both were slain in the rear guard action leading a group of foot sergeants from Ostfalen, then who surrendered with their captains Roland and Reginold of Appen.

At this time, the General of the Nordmarkers Loukas vun Hanenfeldt and his captains Adalrich vun Treskow and Lothar vun Lindow and two regiments of the Nordmarker soldiers remained in reserve and stayed on the field, but they neither drew the sword nor turned their back. These men argued with each other fiercely and then marched towards the Antiocar, but instead of launching an attack, they sent the commanders as their legate to surrender, because they themselves were forced to join the rebellion out of the position of Nordmark and the later ambition of the *Markgrave.* The Antiocar, out of his mildness and the consultation of his men, commended their eventual loyalty and then announced that the two regiments were discharged from service, but soldiers who volunteer were welcomed to stay. He also ordered the commanders to be relieved of their posts temporarily, but allowing them to leave freely and without harm, under terms that they would not resume hostilities with them, nor would they betray the him again to an anti-Antiocar. Then he ordered these soldiers to give up their weapons except for those who wanted to resume their service, and such men should gather around the legate he sent, and the men should decided which regimental banner they wanted to preserve.

The army also controlled the camp of Arnolf, with a large portion of his personal wealth which he brought with the army. This included a large gold goblet, which is of Xinulian origin; a small collection of books, which he probably read; a bronze mirror allegedly crafted by Bothonian craftsmen; a very large clock; many Mark, Groschen and Pfennig; a set of false regalia, and several box of Chienchowese tea. The money was confiscated and then distributed to the soldiers. The scripts and many written documents of his chancery was also captured and sent to the archive. It seemed that Arnolf was more confident of his victory that he brought with him all sorts of necessities to start government, right after the victory which he yearned and believed that he would have.

A little later, when the army controlled the field, the Antiocar returned to the camp amidst shouts of congratulation from the footmen and the officers, as is the usual practice. He was cheerful and glowing with joy because he had subdued his most dangerous enemies in a notable victory. Everywhere the soldiers were boasting loudly that they had killed some or other of the foremost princes of Angern with their own hands. When, however, on their return to the battlefield, one of them found that his father or his brother or his kinsman or someone bound to him by any tie of relationship had fallen in battle, or served in the opposing army and might have been killed, all joy turned to grief and song turned to the voice of those who weep. The whole camp echoed with wailing and shrieking. They spent the following day in the same camp and covered the slain with earth. They sent back those among the dead who were more illustrious and more wealthy to be buried, each in the land of his origin. They cared for the wounded and they sent those whose wounds had rendered them unfit for military service in future to be cared for by their kindred in their hometowns. It was not easy to calculate how many thousands had been killed on this side and on the other in that battle. Yet the chancellor and the judges worked this arduous task and claimed that among Rekkared's men, 3,000 were killed and many more wounded, and from only the heads counted we had more than 7,000 heads cut off from the opponents' necks. More than this number [7,000] of men also surrendered, and many more were captured or wounded.

After the battle ended, as Arnolf realised the disintegration of his coalition, to the grief and distress of the men of Rekkared, he ordered Ambrosios to personally impose an over-hasty sentence in front of the men convening in Lümborg of *Unbesprechung* on Rekkared and anyone who dared to support him, without summoning any other canons, not even naming an Aprokrisier to represent the institutional *basilica* in his now broken government. Moreover, he stated that, lest anyone should accuse him of having, contrary to canonical capitularies, assailed his compatriots, the archiloquetor said that he had received a secret letter hidden in a set of vestments sent by the legate Guillermo himself to cut the men off from the words of Sol by a lawful anathema without any delay or discussion required. No sensible man, however, could be unaware of the principal purpose of this measure: namely, that from now on Arnolf would henceforward wage war on the loyalists more readily and more confidently in the belief that killing them would not be any guilty. In this way perhaps for some time Arnolf seemed to reinvigorated himself, drawing soldiers from the country and giving them weapons from the storage, urging them to fight for the cause of renovating the state, and handing out many scripts of future payments in terms of future taxation. Some men, encouraged by his promises, did appear and gave him a false hope of fielding a second force against Rekkared. From now on the men who had enrolled in Arnolf's army were no longer divided in their loyalties, but either because they were still persuaded by his charisma or had everything against Rekkared altogether. every one of them was a declared rebel. Arnolf showed great endurance as a rebel, for he dined with them on the same table, inspired them with his own determination, reconciled their differences, drank from the same cup and called them by name, and therefore by his flattery bound them to his allegiance.

But more generally, one shall say his general support wavered because now his ability and leadership was proved false by the trial of the Battle of Ioannisberg, because while these people were previously not persuaded by the claims on bloodline, but all the other rationales which I have already discussed before, now they recognised his failure and deemed him not a ruler with wisdom, courage and the discipline to rule as a proper ruler of the Gisels. Arnolf was however working the hardest against these odds. He spent Winume recruiting and training, he rode with a hardened body of horsemen and announced to them that he is fighting a war of mobility and raids, in effect he and his small army now became a body of his personal bandits opposing Rekkared with every means. He and his men went across the damped and marshy lands of Halsaten and organised many raids against the Halsateners, because he wanted to terrorise them and, to some extend, revenge on the Nordmarkers because he deemed them with the crime of infidelity. But these actions didn't last long, as the ground became tougher and the waters freezed in Herbist. Moreover, he realised some raiders from the Kibberians also frequently crossed a border, and though he defeated many of these parties, he thought that his manpower was valuable and cannot be wasted fighting meaninglessly like such.

Therefore, after a discussion with his subordinates, Arnolf himself  was nowhere to be found in Angern, because he and Veremund, the brother of Gundsalvo, as well as some of their followers, entered Rugilland and then Burgenland. Along the road they torched lands and scrambled any food they can get. At first they thought they might escape through Halsaten to Aelethland, but they thought that king of Skandeza [Aelethland] would probably capture them and send them back to Gisely in shackles, so these men, greatly distressed, thought Ermengild might be their final anchor of hope, but not knowing his relationship already with the Portavian king. Ambrosios, however, escaped via the sea by a ship into Solisterra and disappeared from our knowledge altogether, and hence this person was nowhere to be found in any sort of records. After knowing his disapperance, the Antiocar ordered the local clergy to elect a new Archiloquetor of Minne, but this wouldn't be done after thorough discussions, so no person was nominated in 234, and many wished the legate personally preside over this matter. But the son of Arnolf, Giselscaz, who was by then a young man and perplexed by his father's decisions, retreated with a small band of men into the castle of Tuliborg and defied the loyalists for a long time. However, at last Giselscaz was betrayed by certain guardsman called Wanilo. One the siege came to the fourteenth day, when it was not the shift of Giselscaz to lead the men at night, Wanilo secretly went into the bedchamber with some of his conspirators and killed him. But then after Wanilo opened the gates, he showed the head of the young man to the loyalists and demanded the Antiocar to pay him a handsome gift, of 10,000 Mark, in the manner as if he was a foreign leader demanding ransom fitting the position of Giselscaz, but Rekkared said he wouldn't pay even a Pfennig to a mutineer and ordered Wanilo to be hanged accordingly.

When the Antiocar, after destorying the other loyalists of Arnolf in Sostfalen and their strongholds, in late Herbist marched into Angern, a great many of men, either official or administrator, or themselves a gentry or a poor man, locked to see him and recognised him as the real and sole Antiocar, whether they were oppressed by Arnolf or simply fickle in their loyalties. The first among these men was Frankmut of Gölich, the sheriff of Herusen, and Herr Wararecht vun Lennep, the sheriff of Ostwessel, and Michael, the judge of Borcken. Similarly, the men from Hebestede, Comlar, Sugamber, Reudiwiek and many other towns also sent their syndics, mayors to the Antiocar. Some also sought to certify certain charter with the Antiocar, which he ordered the auxiliary chancellor Helisachar to deal with these petitions and then diligently dealt with all other numerous paperworks. He also ordered his troops not to plunder the lands of Angern, and while some banners of his men did do so, he ordered them to be decimated as an example. The next day the king took his seat to receive the Angern in the middle of an open and level field in the place called Spier, where he invited these men to review his troops. There came many men, including the loquetores Wezilo of Harnstede, Bucco of Hemming, Berengar of Starfels, and Friedbert of Geisiche; as well as the aforementioned sheriffs and more, including Sizzo of Bornwald, Edilo vun Katlenburg, and may other lesser men, from the ranks of the *Junker* and the *Meier*, who either because of their family or the splendour of their wealth stood out among the people. He first discuss the matter of administration with these men, and then he publicly rewarded those who performed bravely in the battle with befitting honours according to the *Heerschild.* He then ordered Herr Willhelm vun Haxthausen and Folcmar of Widderstal to remain with a regiment of foot and several units of loyal local *Landwehre* to garrison the castle of Hasenburg temporarily. After hearing from the Angerns, he decided finally that the sheriff Herr Folkwin vun Dreven, because of his renowned mildness and prudence, and that he was named by many other prominent men and officials of Angern, should be appointed the new *Kreiszog*, while then he with the men in the army worked out that because Arnwijk of Umpteda performed well as a regimental commander in the battle with utmost responsibility and courage, that he should be appointed the *Kreiszog*. Finally the men gathered entertained themselves in a great tourney, in which they exchanged blows and studied the art of *Fechten*, especially of longsword, which was greatly fashionable. Unsurprisingly, the man Eumenes from the Life Guards bested many other men and won the day, a wonderous feat which, added with his promotion to a *Reddar* some hours earlier, indeed was a finest moment of a man. Thereafter he was known as Herr Reddar Eumenes vun Ioannisberg, and resumed his duty in the Life Guard.

While the fugitives Ermengild and Arnolf still gathered some mercenary force, they found themselves fighting into winter and the mercenaries were unwilling to fight a battle. But similarly the loyalists also spread into their wintering, after the Antiocar settled the matter in Angern and moved his troops west into Rugiland. While the Antiocar found the lands of the us Quadenburg family was confiscated and distributed to many men, he talked to these men each, either bought the land back from these men with a payment from his own money, or allowed these men to attain these lands, or allowed the men to feun these lands from the state with a rate the same to any other feuning tenants in Rugiland. He also met with the abbot of Dominus-Sol, Sindared of Barralem, and heard gladly that the men of Arnolf did not resort to desecrate his own family mausoleum in the abbey *basilica*yard. He then re-signed the charter concerning abbey lands which suffered from various civil disorders brought by the civil war. The Rugils also came to him in a similar manner to the Angerns, and therefore the Antiocar magnanimously allowed them to retain their positions and discussed with them administrative matters. He appointed Herr Rechila us Turdeta as the *Kreisoberist* and Herr Aigulf us Elhdburg as the new *Kreiszog*, after consulting the Rugil men. However, one specific man was deprived of his office and stipends and was kept for trial. This man, called Herr Fruela us Wadasto, was accused by many actively using the prerogative of taxation granted by Arnolf and actively extortionated the Rugils, because he himself changed several numbers on the tax script and the *Urbar* of collection, so that he can corruptly siphon a large number of Marks into his own possession. He also put down several bands of resisting peasants and *Meier* and persecuted those *Junker* who refused to comply by ravaging their lands; he also levied feuning cash from tenants to the state, violently beat up some *Schulze* who defied him by defending the customary script rendered by the locality or certified by a charter. This Fruela was then executed after a judgement. Therefore the year 244 ended inconclusively, as the rebellion didn't end, despite having been defeated by the Antiocar in person in a bloodshed, or a pitched battle, within the people of Gisels.

### Jahr 245 nach die Interkalation

The Antiocar celebrated Winter Solstice in Mette without much festive spirit, as he was extremely worried about how the matter escalated, especially as he missed the chance to destroy Arnolf all at once, because the opponent of him possessed the cunning of a military commander and defied all invitation to a field clash, but instead moved with the greatest mobility possible. But Rekkared had more to worry than this, as the Council of Mayen ended inconclusively, or one should say, in a total failure. Indeed the concerns of many was not addressed, for instance about the matter of the human capacity of accepting *Phos* and the questions derived from it, namely, the patronage of schools and the election of canons. This matter, demanded by the reformer Gualdo of Pressania, was constantly neglected by several councils, which deemed a more pressing  matter was to discuss the problem of divine *thelema*. I shall say the lack of effective leadership led to the future schism.

At the same day of Winter Solstice, Dr. Theubert van Basten, a canon and chorLoquetor in Awavoordt, out of his great disappointment of the council of Mayen, and out of his scorn to many of the clergymen who participated and did nothing, and also out of his belief of Dr. Omar's theses, delivered a most shocking and fiery speech to many commoners, burgesses, *Meier*, reddars, and so on. At first the syndic Arne brought with him a large number of guards to see if they should capture him, and the local Loquetor Dieter van Heym also gathered a mob of his followers, seeking to silence him all at once, but the syndic's men clashed with them head on as he [Arne], often clashing with the Loquetor, accused Dieter of manipulating his following and disturbing the civil order. Therefore when the two groups of men and women assailed each other with many vile words, Theubert nonetheless made his speech in the Square of Phostra Marca:

> Citizens, good men and women of Awavoordt,
> 
> You hear the clamor in your streets. You see the guards of the syndic clashing with the followers of the Loquetor. You hear whispers from the west of armies marching against armies, of Gisels spilling the blood of Gisels. You see a disaster and the collapse of the *basilica*. You see a state torn asunder, a people divided, and you ask yourselves: why has this calamity befallen us? Some will tell you it is the ambition of Arnolf. Others will blame the pride of Rekkared. But I tell you, this war, this strife, this chaos in our streets and in our fields, is but a fever, a violent symptom of a sickness that lies far deeper, festering in the very heart of our Giselreich!
> 
> For years we have been told that the path to Sol is a narrow and treacherous one, a path granted to those who claim themselves to be inherently superior in their *Phos*, who claim to have possessed more divine light as if it is inherited wealth, who jealously denied you from judging whether who should lead the rites and who should not. And yet what did they do? They quarrel! They hoarded wealth and acted as if the destruction of the *basilica* of Invincible Sol was not a lesson, as if the Intercalation was not a lesson. I speak of the great council at Mayen, from which so many hoped for solace and guidance. And what did this grand assembly of Archiloquetores and legates produce? Did they seek to heal the wounds of the faithful? Did they labour to clarify the sacred words of the Liber Solis for the humble soul? No! They disputed over the boundaries of their sees, like greedy landlords haggling over a patch of dirt! The legate of Colonia, that peacock in his gilded cage, presided over a marketplace of vanities, not a temple of Sol. They speak of jurisdiction, but not of justice; of tithes, but not of charity; of their own authority, but not of the solace that every soul craves from the Three.
> 
> They would have you believe that the very grace of Phos secured their position, so that they can falsely use the authority granted by the Three to do anything other than leading their flock and guiding them to the proper reuniting with Sol. For this they claimed that, not because of the robustness of mind or the hardship of studies, but because inherently, the light of Phos shone more into their heart, than the yard of a burgess or the field of a farmer, so that you, because of your allegedly less Phos, is not able to admonish and correct what you see is not virtuous and fitting! And moreover they claimed that the Intercalation is not an event of mercy, but event of violence, which prompted them to conclude that, to achieve a Second Dawn, one must accept their depraved customs and imposed order, to contribute to their chests with a thousand of Marks, to gift them a fountain of Groschen, and more - so that they can cultivate their wine, to buy off privileges and obtain monopolies, and to waste the good intention of good men and women!
> 
> Therefore I come to you to propose otherwise, that the Second Dawn shall never happen as it is a lie which degraded Sol's division and devises into a farce; I propose that the Four operates with a coherent, clement will which is to help one to achieve one's capacity of Phos, to reflect and transform the unmerciful raw Phos into the true grace, of inspiration, sense and eloquence, which is inherently equal in its potentnial, and not inherited; that we shall have a *basilica* governed by a council of learned and responsible men, who are loyal to the cause of the state and willing to incorporate these into a unified body, who are with their civic duties and responsibilities, not as thieves of contributions and charitable donations; that we shall have a *basilica* of Gisels, with its canons studied and elected from the Gisels, rooted in our soil, speaking in our tongue, led by shepherds who live among their flock and share their hardships and their hopes. Let us overthrow the false Pontists!
> 
> When we are united in a true, direct faith, a faith of the people, then and only then will we find the strength to heal the divisions of our land. May the Four grant us peace clemently, verily and happily in faith.

With the speech ending, the crowd cheered powerfully and an alderman called Gerhard the Clothier immediately called the men to 
